---------------------------
Chapter 7
Reporting and Interpreting Sales Revenue, Receivables, and Cash

Recall from chapter 3:
    Revenue principle
        Revenue is recorded when the goods/services have been given to the customer,
        regardless of when payment is received.

Free on Board Shipping
    FOB Shipping Point
        Title transferred when goods are shipped; buyers generally pay for shipping.

    FOB Destination Point
        Title transferred when goods arrive at destination; seller pays for shipping.

Credit Card (CC) Sales
    Increase customer traffic
    Avoid costs of direct customer credit
    Avoid bad cheques
    Avoid losses from fraud (CC companies usually absorb losses)
    Receive money faster

    Credit Card Discounts
        Implicit 'discount' on price of goods recorded to account for CC processing.

Sales/Cash Discounts
    Discount to encourage fast payment.
    e.g.
        2/10, n/30

        Two percent discount if payed within ten days, else full payment is due in thirty days.
        Note: Full amount minus any discounts are due within thirty days.

Sales Returns and Allowances
    Reduces gross sales revenue to account for returns and allowances for faulty goods.

Note: CC Discounts, Sales Discounts, and Returns/Allowances are all contra revenue accounts.

Gross Profit Percentage
    (Gross Profit) / (Net Sales)

    Indicates management's effectiveness at selling goods for more than they were purchased/produced for.

Reporting Receivables
    Trade Receivables
        Open accounts that trade customers owe to our company due to sale of goods/services on credit.

    Non-trade Receivables
        Receivables not related to normal sale of goods/services.
        e.g.
            Helping to finance a new hire's relocation.

    Note Receivables
        Written promises to pay money (principal) to our company by a specific maturity date,
        along with a specified amount of interest paid on future date(s).

    Note: On a classified Statement of Financial Position, receivables can be current or non-current.

Bad Debts
    Customers who don't pay up.
    Handled with a credit policy that balances a trade-off of attracting customers with credit sales offers with the possibility of bad debts.

    Note: A customer defaulting on receivables leads to a write-off of trade receivables.

    Allowance Method
        Estimates bad debt expenses.
        Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
            Contra asset account.
            Esitmated uncollectable trade receivables.
        Related account: Bad Debt Expense (or Doubtful Accounts Expense)
            Note: Recorded as adjusting entry at end of accounting period.

        e.g.
            Customer defaults on $500 of credit owed...
                Dr Allowance for doubtful accounts (contra asset) 500
                    Cr Trade receivables (asset)                        500

            Note: Did not change carrying amount of Trade Receivables or any other statement of earnings accounts.

        Note: If a customer who was written off suddenly forks over the cash,
            we reverse the write-off then debit cash and credit trade receivables as normal.

    Aging of Trade Receivables Method
        "It's been awhile, I don't think that guy's coming back."

    Receivables Turnover Ratio
        (Net Credit Sales) / (Average Net Trade Receivables)

        Assesses how effective our company's credit granting and collecting are.
        Want: High ratio (fast collection of credit).

    Average Collection Period
        365 / (Receivables Turnover Ratio)

Handling Cash
    Accurate accounting of cash flows.
    Enough cash on hand to pay for operating fees, liabilities, and any emergencies.
    Don't hold on to too much cash at once (invest it instead of letting it collet dust).

    Separation of duties for handling cash
        ...

    Bank Reconciliation.
        ...
