---------------------------------
Chapter 8
Reporting and Interpreting Cost of Sales and Inventory

Why do we need inventory management?
    Avoid selling out of popular items and losing sales and disappointing customers.
    Avoid overstocking unpopular goods and losing money producing unwanted goods.
    Accounting for the flow of inventory in order to optimize the above.

Items included in inventory:
    Merchandise businesses (purchase and resell goods):
        Merchandise inventory
            Sellable goods acquired in finished condition.

    Manufacturing businesses:
        Raw materials inventory
            Ingredients waiting to be used for producing finished goods.
        Work-in-process inventory
            Goods currently being produced from raw materials, but not yet finished.
        Finished goods inventory
            Goods that are done being manufactured and are available for sale.

Costs included in inventory
    Based on cost principle (accounting the cash-equivalent cost).

    Cost for manufactured goods includes
        Direct labour
        Raw materials
        Mannufacuring costs
        Distribution centre costs
        Transportation costs

    Cost for merchandise goods includes
        Cost of purchase
        Duty and brokerage
        Quality assurance costs
        Distribution centre costs
        Transportation costs

Cost of Sales
    Revenue = (units sold) * (sale price)
    Cost of Sales = (units sold) * (unit cost)

    Note: Unit cost accounts for all costs of the merchandised/manufactured goods.

    BI - beginning inventory
    P - new purchases
    EI - ending inventory remaining unsold

    Cost of Goods Available for Sale = Cost of BI + P

    Cost of Sales Equation:
        BI + P - EI = COS

Perpetual vs Periodic Inventory Systems
    Purchases for the period are always accumulated.

    Cost of sales and ending inventory are determined in two ways.

    Perpetual Inventory System
        Detailed record of all goods in stock.
        Modified with each transaction throughout each period.
            Purchases and sales recorded directly in inventory account.
            Sales and cost of sales recorded directly and simultaneously.
        Information is available perpetually.

    Periodic Inventory System
        Don't keep track of goods during the year.
        Instead, count physical goods at the end of each year.
            Multiply units by unit cost for ending inventory.
            Cost of sales calculated with Cost of Sales Equation.
            Temporary Purchase account is used.
            Revenues are recorded at time of sale.
            Cost of sales not recorded until final inventory count.
        Lower cost than perpetual (until cheap computers and barcodes happened).
        Information is available periodically.

Inventory Errors
    Overestimated Ending Inventory?
        Underestimated cost of sales...
            Earnings before tax overstated in current year!
        Overstated beginning inventory next year...
        Cost of sales overstated next year!
            Earnings before tax understated next year!

Inventory Costing Methods
    Specific Identification Method
        Cost of each item is accounted for individually.
        IFRS does not allow this for large amounts of similar goods.
        This method is also impractical for large quantities of similar goods.
        This method works well with expensive items like planes.

    FIFO
        First goods purchased are the first ones sold.
        A queue of goods.

    Weighted Average
        Computes weighted average unit cost of goods available for sale.
        Weighted average unit cost of goods available for sale is used for
         cost of sales and ending inventory.
