International Studies 101

Kraven (Karen) from McMaster
New to Waterloo and Inst101

Good intro to Poli Sci / Intst minors but open to all

A lot of different perspectives to be applied to the world.
No textbook!
"No one answer to many questions posed."

Holistic approach to global issues.

This course won't cover everything, but it will be as diverse in
themes as possible.

Each year has a different theme - previously war, inequality.
This year - mobility.

Mobility is how people, things, ideas, and systems cross borders.
How do power, trade, relationships, trade, poverty, affect this?

Lectures are designed around places that are defined by how ideas
and people move through them.

    e.g. 2nd lecture on airports and border security.
        How has the war on terror affected movement?

    e.g. Wallstreet, the largest stock exchange in the world.
        Defined by how capital moves through it.
        How is the global economy affected.

    Other topics include:

        Camps and detention sites (refugees).

        Bases and blacksites (war)

        Resort, safari, and village (tourism)

        Amazon and tar sands (environmental politics, resource extraction)

141 students registered for this class! (Room capacity is ~150)

The rest of this lecture will discuss logistics of the course.
    * McMaster Avenue to Learn == Waterloo LEARN

"Changes in copyright law that allows me to post content in closed course
website."

All the readings are posted. Readings aren't tracked online.
Book chapters are also available through library reserves.
Journal articles are available through the library journal system.

One reading per week, fairly short.
"A tease or example for each weekly topic."

    e.g. Airport article discussing border security in U.S. aviation.

Readings are expected and will be on the exam.

Readings are specific, lectures are more broad.

So a final exam essay can draw from the readings as examples.
"You won't be able to pass the course without coming to class and doing the
readings."

International news sources are posted for contemporary examples.
    
    e.g. Labour start, Upside down world

Tutorials worth 15% (10% participation, 5% attendance)
"An easy fifteen percent, just show up and talk about content."

No tutorials today! They will start next week.

On participation - are you talking about course material, or just random
current events? Are you furthering the discussion with your comments or are
you limiting it / ending it?

Tutorial TA isn't necessarily our marker.

First year course with lots of writing, so some tutorials are devoted to
writing skills (e.g. academic citations, research question creation,
db searching).

First assignment - "A think piece on mobility"
    Due in two weeks (May 19).
    Not a research paper.
    2-3 pages double spaced.
    Just a reflection on your position!
    Consider your own stories of mobility, as well as themes introduced next
    week.
    Essay format, but not necessarily a thesis and cited sources.

Other assignments will be:
    Film review - watch a fictional movie related to mobility,
    and write a critical response to it with regards to our course themes.

        Suggested films are oscar-winners, many non-english.

    Research paper - based on one of the topic weeks (3-5, 8-11) of the class.
        
        Pick a week that interests you the most, and do your own research on a
        question raised by that discussion for you.

        Create a research question, clear the topic by June 23, and do research
        outside of the assigned readings.
        "Cleared in writing by me or by a TA by June 23."

Cumulative final exam (Date TBA) draws on entire course contents.

Last lecture is July 21, which is two weeks before the exam period starts.

Prof lives in Hamilton, so TAs might organize a review session in the two weeks
before exams.

"You may wish to skip class and go to the beach, but there's probably no beach
in Waterloo, is there?" :P

"Slides used to aid visual learners, but not for notes."

Take-home points from each lecture will be posted online.

Contact info:
    ccraven@uwaterloo.ca "I answer emails whenever."
    Only on-campus on Tuesdays.
    Office hours Tusdays 2:30-4pm, HH 340
Lecture 2 May 12 2015

The nation state may not be a good starting point for international studies.
Mobility can be a better starting point.

We tend to see the world as a map of independent nation-states.
However, we have a long history of change, mobility, conquering and being
conquered.

This lecture will be focused on international history through mobility.
In particular, colonialism.

    e.g.
        
        Movement, exploration, and distribution of wealth.

Nation state has only been around since 18th or 19th century, so the
idea of "international" is only that old.

Contemporary conflicts are often the result of tension regarding who can travel
where.

15th century trade routes - Indian Ocean
There is nothing new about people travelling long distances and conflicting,
conquering, or pillaging with people in other locations.

What is colonialism?
We tend to date 1492, the year that Christopher Columbus bumped into
North America when looking for India.

Three aspects of American colonialism that made it stand out:

    1. Scale

        Large amount of violence and genocide
        50-100 million lived in the Americas prior to the Spanish Europeans
        arriving. 50-90% of those people died, due to disease, forced labour,
        or intentional kiling.

        Why?

        Ideological differences, technological advantages, differing immunities
        for diseases.

        African slave trade (map: 1500-1870) was also large.
        Slavery was not new, but the slavery in the 16th century was on a
        whole different scale. 9-11 million people were enslaved, mainly from
        Africa to South America (to work on plantations).

        Chattel slavery - en-masse taking of people, indiscriminantly, from
        one part to another for a specific purpose.

    2. Scientific Racism

        Discrimination is not new for humans, but european colonialism truly
        became racism, based on categorizing people by scientific categories
        based on racial characteristics.

        These characteristics became linked to biology.
        Western europeans became privileged with positive characteristics, while
        others became associated with negative characteristics. These negative
        characteristics were used to justify slavery.

        In the past, slavery was justified by political means, like losing a
        war. Now it's justified by physical/intellectual inferiority.

        Phrenologist - specialist in measuring peoples' heads.
        European head shapes became more associated with intellectual prowess,
        etc.

        "The White Man's Burden" a responsibility to civilize others.
        Pear soap ads discussing "brightening dark corners of the earth".

        The ancient greeks used terms such as "civilized" and "barbaric" to
        differentiate from Greek and non-Greek.

        European colonialists, however, became about changing the other
        cultures.

        Residential schools interfered with people's lives in intimate ways.
            e.g. hygiene

    3. Accumulation and Production

        Economic system that became known as capitalism.

        It's easy to look at capitalism and assume it's a universal thing, but,
        like the nation-state, it's a relatively new invention.

        Capitalism could not have happened without colonialism, because it
        relies on overproduction.

        Previous to capitalism, what was produced was only what's necessary to
        live, for social reproduction.
        
        Social reproduction - having kids, raising them, etc.

        Early forms of colonialism (when Spanish and Portugese went to the
        Americas) discovered many riches (gold, etc.) and took them from the
        Americas back to Europe.

        Before, the gold was pre-existant and transferred via conquest.

        Goods discovered in the Americas, like fur, were used to create
        excessive goods. These goods were more than what was needed for
        social reproduction.

        More was needed to be produced to ensure that profits could be made by
        the business, so that profits can be re-invested in order to expand.

        That profit-driven system is an essential part of capitalism and
        business.

        This creation of surplus that is used for the sake of creating more
        wealth was a new idea - surplus was traditionally a safeguard for
        disasters, e.g. stockpiles of wheat.

        Prior to this system of capitalism, gold was intrinsically valuable.

        Now with capitalism, gold could be accumulated; wealth could be
        accumulated.

        Hereditary rule was changed into liberalism.

        This required mass amounts of resources to keep going.
        Slide: cotton farm in South America, and a cotton factory in England.

        These changes caused a massive shift in the distribution of wealth in
        society. Wealth was no longer just held by royalty and land-owners, it
        could be held by emerging capitalists and entrepreneurs.

        This led to the rule of law, etc.

        It also created a vast disparity of wealth in the world, larger than
        ever before seen in the world.

        The scale of inequality (concentration of wealth vs poverty) was large.

        A large body of workers in Europe were displaced in order to work in
        city factories, while the owners of the companies became rich with the
        profits.

        Many of these Europeans had to move as a result of these changes, and
        many ended up in the Americas.

        Moving 11 million people from a specific region had a drastic affect on
        the old and new regions.

        Abolition of slavery created a system of indentured labour.
        (Technically considered free, but given over to a company in exchange
        for agreed benefits, e.g. transport to the Americas.)
        
        Some of the tensions in the Carribean today are a result of the
        differences between African slave labour and Indian indentured labour. 

        Readings discuss "diasporas" - people who have moved from one part of
        the world, but maintain a connection to their previous home; they care
        about the politics, families, and events in their home countries.

        We have what scholars call "the development of underdevelopment".
        The poverty that we see today is not the result of regional flaws, but
        rather because of how certain regions were literally underdeveloped.
        The conditions of poverty and inequality were created by the desire for
        accumulated wealth and development. The development of one place relies
        on the underdevelopment of another.
        
        The economy of any one region is clearly related to other regions due to
        the global trade systems created by colonialism.

        Between 16th and 20th centuries, greater wealth and deeper connections
        were created than have ever been seen before. There is a lot of good and
        technological advancement that comes out of this. Universities are
        created, and vast wealth is obtained. On the other hand, we have a
        system that rationalized inequality - it made inequality seem rational
        and inevitable, via scientific racism, capitalism, the civilizing
        mission, and the need to expand wealth. These pursuits made inequality
        seem rational and inevitable.

        The African continent is now seen in the global economy as a region
        where resources are obtained.

What is globalization?

    Picture:

        Democracy -->
        <-- WTO
            
            - Ranforest Action Network

        This banner drop started "The Battle in Seattle" protests.

    What does globalization mean to you?

        - Making the wordl seem smaller
        - Interdependant economies

    Globalization is one of those words thrown around a lot for different
    reasons.

    We will talk about the relationship between colonialism and globalization.

    We refer to globalization as the intermixing of the globe's societies,
    cultures, and ecoomies.
    They aren't necessarily becoming the same things, but rather becoming a
    network that is interdependant.

        e.g. The American economic collapse affecting the entire world.

    After the second world war, we saw the development of the global economy
    and related institutions - the United Nations, the World Bank, the WTO,
    the IMF, etc.

    We also had a rapid expansion of global media following the second world
    war and during the technological growth from the 70s and 80s.

    Two different perspectives on globalization:

        Thomas L. Friedman - "The World is Flat"
            
            "Globalization 3.0 differs from...
             1.0 and 2.0 were driving primarily by European and American
             individuals..."
             Globalization 3.0 makes it possible for more people to get
             involved.

        Arundhati Roy, Indian author and activist

            "I think of globalization like a light which shines brighter on a
             few people and the rest are in darkness, wiped out."

Rise of the nation-state and self-determination

    (Painting celebrating the French Revolution)

    Rapid globalization makes it easier for things to cross borders.
    To Friedman, this makes the world flat and accessible to all.
    To Arundhati, this means some borders are being wiped out.

    As wealth accumulated in Western Europe, they could develop complex
    beaurocracies.

    The rise of capitalism pushed political organization to liberalism, where
    citizens are considered equal and are represented fairly (at least for men,
    initially).

    Wealth is created with entrepreneurial spirit rather tha hereditary wealth.

    These sentiments of equality gave rise to the nation-state, as well as
    sovereignty and self-determination.

    Sovereignty: The concept of a single political authority over a particular
    state, and not by any external authority. Nation-states were autonomous,
    and the sovereign (government, ruler, etc.) was in full control.

    Self-determination was introduced after the first world war (1917, 1918) as
    a concept of each nation being able to determine what they do.

    Decolonization and the Myth of Independance

        Movements using the language of nationalism to assert independance from
        colonial powers.

        Quotes:

            Patrice Lumamba - anti-colonial leader and president of the Congo

            Frantz Fanon - anti-colonial author (?)

        Note: At the end of each lecture, the slides (visuals) will be posted as
        well as brief take-home points of the topics covered.

        A lot of colonies didn't change as a result of decolonization, because
        there was a lack of infrastructure needed for internal
        industrialization - a lot of infrastructure existed only to transport
        goods to ruling nations.
    
        During the cold war, a lot of governments became seen as too unstable to
        remain in power. A lot of corporations located in the developed world
        continued to remain in control of resources (e.g. oil) in colonized
        regions during decolonization.

        Why does this all matter?

        Globalization affects national control over borders, so it is not that
        new at all when we consider all of these things that have happened in
        the past. Corporations coming and going across borders is similar to
        the colonization efforts in, say, sub-saharan Africa.

    Map: Tangled routes of migrants - modern migration around the globe.
    Map: Global income inequality - differences in accumulation of wealth.
    Map: Climate change reshaping water - differences in water availability.
    Map: Cross-border investment - amount of money crossing borders and
         where is is being invested.
         Lots of investment between North America and Europe, but much
         smaller investment in former colonies.
    Map: Purchasing land overseas - countries purchasing land in other
         countries as a means of maintaining food/resource security back
         home. 21st century colonialism?
         Purchasing land instead of taking it.

So what about mobility? 3 contexts:

    1. Unequal ability between different states to control what crosses
       borders.
        
            e.g.

                States in North America and Eastern Europe are increasingly
                restricting their borders from migrants.

            e.g.

                Incresingly militarized borders.

            e.g.

                States in the developing world having a difficult time keeping
                international corporations out; being compelled by the WTO to
                accept international trade.

    2. Continued uneven distribution of wealth.

        Wealth continues to gravitate to certain centers that rely on
        international labour. These centers change - mre recently China, etc.

        Workers are still forcibly relocated to centers of wealth and
        employment.

        This ties back to the concept of diasporas.

            e.g. Workers in Dubai/UAE maintaining ties back to their home
                 countries.

    3. Continued need to respond to violence and displacement.

        Fear of the presence of "hot wars" spreading violence.

        Fear of climate change creating difficult living conditions.

        Increasing fear of the dispossessed - people on the move - created by
        this climate of fear.

            e.g.

                People "swarming" from a certain place due to climate change.

    Note that these contexts and histories should be a good foundational context
    for the think piece assignment due next week.

    Note: Referencing external events is acceptable as long as we relate to the
    themes/contexts discussed in class.

Look at the reading for airport security as a jumping off point in the next
lecture.

Lecture 3 May 19 2015

Mobility and Border Security

Airport security

    Where our mobility is slowed down in the name of security!

    Picture: Lineup at U.S. pre-clearance in Pearson Airport

        This is a fairly new system - part of "post-9/11 security measures".
        A bilateral agreement done to streamline security practices between
        Canada and U.S.

        Also "nexus" program for pre-approving passengers for customs.

        Aftermath of Sept 11 2001 - U.S. created a "smart border security"
        system, as well as the Department of Homeland Defense.

        Canada also created the Canada Border Services Agency and CATSA.

        On the one hand, border systems had to create barriers to try and stop
        threats. On the other, they had to maintain permeability of the border
        and uphold international travel and relations.

        Moves to create enhanced border security were actually in progress
        before 9/11, so we can't simply say that these initiatives were in
        direct response to the 9/11 attacks. The ball was already rolling.

        Although these changes look like they are increasing security and
        efficiency at the border, certain historical contexts can lead to
        criticisms.

Cold War 1947-1991

    Picture: Map of the world, 1989

    Soviet Union covered much of Europe and Asia.

    Both sides had security concerns related to nuclear weapons and the
    risk of Mutually Assured Destruction (MAD)

    Satirical cartoon: Calvin and Hobbes shooting each other with darts
    and simultaneously "killing" each other.

    The U.S. had no qualms about supporting the middle east, Angola, and
    dictators in latin america. These regimes were supported by the U.S.
    as part of a security strategy while fighting communism.

    The Vietnam War was a "proxy war" for the cold war.

    Efforts were focused on securing against communist influence, or
    "containment" of the "spread" of communism.

    There was also motivation to maintain supply lines, etc.
    The cold war was really a series of hot wars, or violent conflicts,
    outside of the superpower nations.

    Resentment against the superpowers fuels a lot of contemporary
    conflict.

        e.g. The current situation in the middle east can be tied back
        to resentment created during the cold war.

    Movement looked a lot different during the cold war. The so-called
    "Iron Curtain" between eastern and western europe made it very
    difficult to cross between the two regions.

    After 1949 revolution in China, movement to/from that region was
    also limited.

    The soviet "sphere of influence" cut off access from american
    trade.

    Much conflict during that time was, therefore, a matter of
    maintaining economic influence.

    End of cold war - fall of the Berlin wall, reunification of Germany.

    By 1991, the soviet union was ended, Russia was created, as well as
    other post-soviet countries.

    For these countries, they had no choice but to participate in the
    global economy. Borders were opened between countries in ways that
    they haven't been in over 50 years. People were able to move to
    escape oppression, poverty, etc.

    There was a sense of hope in the 1990s. Some speculated that the
    last great conflict was over, and we had reached the "end of
    history" and the world would unite under democracy and the free
    market.

    However, it didn't turn out like that. None of the resentment and
    fallout created by the previous 50 years could be undone, and it
    couldn't be contained by the promise of capitalism - we couldn't
    all be happy and free.

    There was a shift in tone between positive jubilation after the cold
    war to a more ominous atmosphere as we realized that conflicts still
    exist and may even be worse. We now have to defend against small
    groups or even individuals.

    Risk management - quote from Donald Rumsfeld:

        There are things we know, things we don't know, and lots of
        things we don't know we don't know.

    As the global economy expanded, we also had more and more threats
    and risks to manage. This created a paradox for border security.

Contradictory borders

        Picture: Protestor sign

    Shangan agreement - freedom of movement between everyone in the
    european union. This increased the strength of the EU and led to
    increased integration of internal borders and increased focus on
    a singular external border around the entire EU.

    Frontex system developed - an integrated border security for the
    entire EU. FRONTEX is a pre-clearance system; people with nexus
    cards can be fast-tracked through border security (no questions
    asked regarding travel intent, etc. but baggage is still screened).

    Border security at the U.S./Mexico border also increased
    significantly, and had a very large budget. We'll discuss this more
    in another lecture.

    Intelligent borders

        Picture: Biometric passports
        Picture: FRONTEX clearance gates in Europe

        Advanced collection and categorization of data to assess each
        passengers' "risk level".

    The idea of externalizing risks - risk management happening outside
    of the U.S. borders. Questions asked of you to assess your risk
    level, while also placing that risk outside of American soil.

        e.g. American pre-clearance authorities placed within, say,
        Canadian borders.

    This imperative keeps risk outside of the physical U.S.

    Airports themselves now act like borders in many ways. All of the
    trappings of a border - customs, security, and pre-clearance - are
    all contained in an airport, and you essentially enter a new country
    without changing your geographical location.

    Increasing use of biometric data - a relatively new practice.
    Embedding of fingerprints and other physical attributes/measurements
    in our identification system. This has emerged in partnership with
    private companies - private airlines, analytics firms, security
    firms - required to make risk management happen smoothly.

    A lot of data is required to make the determinations regarding
    someone's mobility (or lack therof).

    This raises concerns for accountability.

        e.g. Carrier liability

            Someone being denied entry means the airline is responsible
            for returning the passenger.

            Putting immigration enforcement duties in the hands of
            private companies or militaries is problematic because
            these organizations have their own agendas.

    How are governments held accountable for data collection done by
    private companies?

Racial Profiling

    Who pays the costs of all this securitization?

    In a sense, we all pay the cost by sacrificing privacy and
    convenience.

    However, racial profiling, criminalization, and stereotyping
    has a much more drastic impact.

    The acceleration of the criminalization of these groups has
    become more and more problematic post-2001.

    The prominence and justification of racial profiling is largely
    a result to the reaction to 9/11. The stereotype of the "Islamic
    terrorist" became very common, and many people were detained or
    scrutinized solely based on demographics.

    No fly lists were created, Canada created the National Security
    Certificate system in 2002 (later removed) for watching certain
    individuals.

        Picture: Maher Arar, Canadian citizen extradited to torture
        in Syria in 2002

    Pictures: Eyal checkpoint, Qalqilia, West Bank 

        Checkpoint between Israel and the West Bank
        Used to control movement of workers from the West Bank to Israel
        522 different checkpoints and roadblocks exist between Israel
        and the West Bank.
        Some argue that these limitations placed on workers from
        Palestine are too great.
        A quarter of all Palestinians live in poverty.
        All workers passing over the border have to pass through a
        complex system of borders - at Eyal, just one gate - before
        getting to work, and there is no guaruntee that they will even
        get to work on time.
        This process is reversed coming home, essentially turning each
        work day into a 14 hour day.
        48000 permanent work permits given to Palestinians, of which
        there are over 100000.
        Israel West Bank wall constructed to further decrease movement,
        and even cuts off one town from its surrounding neighbourhood in
        one place. Once completed, it will be over 700km long.
        Since 2006, in response to attacks on Israel by Gaza, the
        Israeli government issued a blockade on trade from Gaza.
        
        Reason for all of this information: The way movement is impacted
        by border security actually has a large impact on inequality.

        U.S. security leads to racial profiling.

        Palestinian border security leads to economic inequality.

        The use of the wall and checkpoints actually has a great deal of
        impact on the economic fortunes on different groups.

        Checkpoints further stigmatize Palestinian workers as a group
        to be feared, which in turn justifies enhanced security
        measures.

        So whose security is actually being maintained here? How do we
        even define security?

            The ability to work.
            The freedom to move unrestricted.
            The ability to not be scrutinized against.
            The ability to remain safe.

        Some of these debates surrounding security practices might make
        a great topic for your research paper!

    Picture: Lineup in Israel - people waiting in a fenced compund to get to
    work.

    Picture: Cornwall, Ontario, protest on reserve against mandatory gun
    possession for border agents.

Akwesasne

    Conflicts between members of the community being forced to deal with border
    crossings within their own reserve.

    Picture: Idle No More Protest, Akwesasne, 2013

        Demanding sovereignty

    After the development of the nation-states and settler nations (like Canada)
    these borders came to overwrite the existing nations' borders.

    The Akwesasne reserve's borders were created pre-colonization. The imposed
    border was agreed upon by the U.S. and Canada, but not by the reserve.

    These nations are still here, though.

    What legitimacy do nation-state borders have if they were founded on the
    destruction of indigenous nations, and many first nations don't even
    claim citizenship in the new nation?

    The first nations are not being allowed the same control as that of the
    Canadian government.

Key themes:

    Sovereignty is not a stable or fixed thing.
        However, sovereignty is also about history, and is about acts of
        sovereignty. When the Canadian state arms border guards, that is an act
        of sovereignty. When that is protested, that is another act of
        sovereignty.

        When passports are issued by our government, that is an act of
        sovereignty. Nations choosing to ignore passports or to not accept them
        is another act of sovereignty.

        Difficult question: Are first nations who reject passports/citizenship
        still considered Canadian citizens?
        
        Not all sovereignties are recognized equally, but all can be claimed
        and/or asserted.

        Argument: All of North America is actually international, as it
        encompasses many different supposedly sovereign nations.

    Borders and checkpoints are places where power is exerted.

        The power to determine who is risky or who isn't, or to arm guards, or
        to determine how many gates must be crossed through to get to work,
        or to determine which side of the border a new wall is built on.

Take home points will be posted on LEARN.

Lecture 4 May 26 2015

Multinationals and Wall Street

Preamble - why is this important?

    How did we get to the point where we have large, multinational corporations
    that are constantly on the lookout for profitable opportunities?

    How did financial institutions and capitals become so important in the
    global economy?

    WalMart had 2 million employees across the world, 1 million of which are in
    the U.S. 80% of their supply is from China.

    McDonalds employs 1.7 million people globally. It's meat supplier, Cargill
    International, has over 170 000 employees.

    Starbucks has over 180 000 employees.

    These are massive institutions and play a big role in the global economy.

Important distinction between an international and transnational corporation.

Post WWII economy - embedded liberalism.
The instability and lack of regulation of the financial sector led to its
collapse. There was also a lack of global economic structure.

The command economy of the soviet union also played a key role in the post-WWII
economy.

A revolutionary and radical labour movement were a big part of the American
economy also played a big role. They fought for labour rights, and often had
Marxist roots that worked against capitalism.

This climate led to embedded liberalism and the Breton Woods system.

Embedded liberalism

    A liberal economic system based on a free market of exchange and production
    without causing the kind of inequality and instability that had
    characterized the first part of the 20th century.

    So embedded liberalism became a compromise.

    They agreed to a system of collective bargaining that limited the union's
    ability to strike. In exchange, unions were provided welfare and help for
    people who could not work.

    Compromise between labour, business, and governments.

    Labour - pull back and use collective bargaining.
    Businesses - agreed to pay high wages.
    Governments - agreed to provide welfare.

    This led to a new system called Keynesianism.

    Capitalism is based on a cycle of booms and busts.
    At this point, government policy adopted the role of mitigating each crisis.

The Bretton Woods System

    The first moment of a new phase of multilateralism - agreements between more
    than two countries to abide by rules and procedures that abide by external
    institutions.

    Sovereignty still applies, but you agree as a sovereign to abide by some
    international rules to abide by.

    The group of people who negotiated this system in 1944 were the victors of
    the second world war (US, UK, not the Soviet Union).

    Created the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
    Originally, WB was IBRD (International Bank of Reconstruction and
    Development).

    Decided on a fixed exchange rate ($1 US == X amount of gold), and all other
    currencies were pegged against that.

    This allowed the US to become economically dominant.

    Discussions of creating a multilateral organization to govern international
    commerce, but it fell through. In its place, GATT was created.

    Global Agreement on Tariffs and Trades

    These institutions created "an even playing field", but there were actually
    a lot of inequalities present.

    The stability provided by this system led to much economic growth in North
    America, and later Europe.

    The Marshall Plan led to an enormous growth in European and Japanese
    economy.

        The European economy was in shambles, and was forced to buy from the US
        and also created a reliance on foreign oil created by American companies
        in the middle east.

    A lot of this growth was reliant on consumerism present in the US and
    Canada. With people earning salaries, there was a larger demand for goods to
    consume. There were also campaigns to get people to be consumers and buy new
    products.

    During the war, women were the predominant workers (in factories), because
    of the demand for ammunitions and the lack of male workforce.

    After the war, women were fired in order to bring back the male workers.

    To deal with this contradiction, national campaigns were created to make
    consumerism a part of the female identity and "entice women back into the
    kitchen".

    The influence of state support and the creation of a consumer society
    allowed American and European corporations to fleurish and expand.

        The big three carmakers
        Iconic corporations were created - IBM, etc.

    So specific policies were put in place to enable the growth of corporations.
    Companies like coca cola was based in a specific country of origin.

        e.g. Coke was produced in the US and sold overseas.

    These companies had an international scope but national profits.

    As it was hard under the Bretton woods agreement to exchange currencies,
    these companies had an incentive to keep production local.

    These are international corporations.

1970s, end of Bretton Woods Agreement and the changing corporations

    The global economy entered into a new crisis in the wake of consumerism.
    Companies felt pressure to expand, along with the high union wages, combined
    with a saturation of the market (not enough consumers) led to a decline in
    profits and expansion.

    Decolonization in the 1960s had created the ability to move production to
    the global south.

    There was also a rise in non-American competition (e.g. Japanese
    corporations). So there was a desire for American companies to maintain
    their competitive advantage.

    When trying to maintain a competitive advantage, the number one thing
    companies do is to reduce labour costs.

    This is the context in which outsourcing and offshoring began.

    Outsourcing - shift production by contracting out to an international
    company instead of paying local workers.

    Offshoring - picking up your company and moving it to another country.

    Both of these processes emerged at this time period.

    We also had the end of the fixed exchange rate after a currency crisis
    in the US, leading them to remove their currency from the gold standard and
    move to a floating exchange rate - all currencies are pegged in relation to
    each other (X$ US == Y$ CAD).

    We also saw the oil crisis in 1973 - a trade embargo put in place by OPEC
    for trade with the US. Overnight, the price of oil in the US skyrocketed.

This crisis in the 1970s, along with offshoring, led to a new economic theory -
Neoliberalism.

    Limiting government interference and moving more government roles into the
    private market.

    The kind of prosperity promised in the 1940s wasn't happening.

    The government policies put in place by Keynesianism wasn't working, and
    some thought this government interference was creating this economic
    downturn.

    A real free market would self-regulate.

    In the 70s and 80s thi caught on with Thatcher in the UK and with Reagan in
    the US.

    Key tenets of Neoliberalism:

        Deregulating markets, especially financial markets (rules put in place
        after 1930).

        Free trade (elimination of trade barriers)

        Privatization of state-run services

        Elimination/reduction of social spending

        Clawing back labour rights; union-busting.

    This led to a massive, orchestrated attack on unions.
    Unionization is currently very rare - only 8% in US and 16% in Canada are
    unionized workers.

    (This is all in the developed world; next week, we will cover what
    neoliberalism looked like for the global south.)

    Shift from international to transnational corporations.

    This time period saw the rise of the ability for corporations to exert more
    control/influence on governments and labour capitals. So the idea of
    attracting corporations with low wages, low taxes, limited restrictions, and
    lax labour laws came to fruition.

    Corporations could exact leverage on governments to get what they want.

    e.g. MegaCorp threatening to move factories out of Mexico
        "Labour Arbitrage", "The race to the bottom"

    Corporations became able to use different working standards against each
    other - battling each other to negotiate the lowest wages.

    This is the kind of capitalism that "won" after WWII.

How do corporations look after neoliberalism?

    One of the dominant features of the older form of capitalism was free trade,
    or reducing local quotas, international taxes and tariffs so that goods can
    be traded freely without government interference.

    Neoliberalism gave rise to the WTO, in contrast to GATT.

    The World Trade Organization

        161 signatory countries, including China (2001).

        Explosion of bilateral trade agreements in 80s/90s, including NAFTA.

        NAFTA was a precursor to a lot of later free trade agreements - a model,
        or a benchmark, for future agreements around the world.

        Recently - creation of the trans-pacific partnership for free trade
        between countries along the pacific rim - China, Japan, Canada, US.
        One of the most extensive free tradea agreements to date.

        WTO is a place to discuss trade relations, agreement, and dispute
        resolution.

        WTO is unique as an international organization with actual penalties by
        not abiding by WTO standards - imposed trade sanctions.

        Criticisms:
            
            Bias towards global north (e.g. production subsidies).
            Fees for using technologyy and medication for global south.
            Questions of sovereignty in the global south.
            Limitations on people crossing borders.

        What characterizes a corporation now:

            Spread out all over the world - production, headquarters, etc. all
            in different places.

            "The disaggregation of the supply chain."

            These supply chains are becoming increasingly dispersed.

            So it's harder for corporations to be held accountable when there
            are contractors and sub-contractors are involved.

        Today, the dominant corporations are retailers (e.g. WalMart, Amazon)
        because they buy so much capital and have so much influence on
        suppliers.

        There is now more room for corporations to rise from non-American
        countries, like the BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China,
        South Africa).

        There is also a "BRICS Bank" that operates like the World Bank, but for
        BRICS countries only (potential research paper topic!).

The Rise of Financialization in the 1980s

    "This conversation could get really technical."

    Recall how deregulation of financial industries was an important piece of
    neoliberalism.

        e.g. 1990s repeal of Glass Steagles Act that kept commercial banks and
        securities firm separate.

    Some say the overturning of that legislation was key to the 2008 crisis.

    An increased portion of the economy became dedicated to insurace,
    realestate, and investment work.

    Economic activity became geared towards financial gain and financial goals.
    Wealth production was being moved away from the production of actual goods
    to the valuation of stock and currencies.

    So all of the circulation of wealth passes through large financial sectors,
    particularly in New York and London.

    Financialization and Corporations

        Decisions geared towards stocks, shareholder value.

        Relying on purchasing financial services.

        Shifting of profits across borders as a way to evade taxes.

    The objective of the corporation has been narrowed to increasing stock
    value.

        e.g. A company like WalMart isn't valued by its total assets or total
        sales, but by how those things combine to increase stock value in any
        given day.

        Relocation, etc. is encouraged if it increases the stock price,
        regardless or long-term affects.

        Executive salaries fluctate based on stock price; corporate executives
        now have incentives to create short-term gains for the company.

        This has an enormous impact on how states interact with corporations.
        Incentives are now focused on what they will do for today's stock price.

    Corporations are now increasingly reliant on purchasing financial services
    from financial centers.

    Corporations are not only shifting production across borders, they are
    shifting their finances across borders in order to evade taxes.

        Financial firms are now managing tax avoidance for different
        corporations, in addition to circulating investments.

        So, it becomes hard to follow the money in corporations and hold
        companies accountable due to the disaggregation and financialization of
        the corporation.

Big takeaway:

    None of this is natural of inevitable in the global economy.
    The way corporations look today aren't natural occurences.
    It took national agreements, legislation, defeating unions, legal
    arrangements for taxes and finance, and the defeat of liberalism in order to
    ceate this mobility of corporations.

    It doesn't operate this way because of the free market, but actually because
    of a complex array of regulation, arrangements and benefits afforded by
    governments to corporations.

    Film "Margin Call" is a fictionalized account of what happened in the 2008
    financial crisis from an internal view.

Take home points posted on LEARN!



Reminder: Clear research paper topic by june 23rd (on paper). Talk about which
details/questions/topic you will explore.

Assignment clarification:
    "Structure" of the character in the film around mobility.

We do need a bibliography, including a citation of the film, internal
citations of the lectures (by date), and any additional readings.

Summary from last week:

    "Economic workers", or migrant workers.

    The type of displacement being created in rurual areas is creating a pool
    of migrant labour for factory work.

    Export-oriented development demands this labour pool.

    China, Mexico pushing people off their land and into factories.

    By keeping a distinction between rural and urban citizens, countries keep
    the labour forces distinct, whereas migrant workers do not get the same
    rights and are seen as dispensible labour.

    Either stay in your country, or migrate to the Americas as an undocumented
    worker without any benefits or labour rights.

    Canada has been shifting towards "temporary" migrant programs.
    Migrants are given seasonal visas and have less of an ability to claim
    labour rights as other Canadians do, as they are excluded from applying for
    permanent residency.
    This is similar to the situation in China - migrant workers are still
    subject to a "border" between their home country and the country that they
    are working in.

    So migrant workers are very disposable.

    Migrant workers are the flipside of transnational outsourcing - they become
    migrants because they are necessary for the export-oriented economy (in
    factories, American farms).

    NAFTA

        Debt crisis in Mexico

        Subsidized land holdings

        Mexican government needed a loan from the IMF in order to make its
        payments.

        IMF took on a new role - placing conditions on the loan - structural
        adjustment - that changed the way the Mexican government worked.
        It adjusted spending, reduced corn subsidies, and opened Mexico up to
        free trade (between Mexico, US, Canada -- NAFTA!).
        So Mexico was flooded with American corn, farmers couldn't compete, and
        these workers were displaced from their land.
        Also led to a reform of indigenous land rights that displaced people.
        These people couldn't live off land anymore, and had to move to cities.

        Mexico was spending a lot less on internal industrial development, and
        became less self-reliant.

        Mexico spent more money in the "maquilas"(?), export-oriented labour
        capitals.

        No more Mexican industries to employ people. Only factories meant to
        create exported goods.

Political Migrants

    Refugees, asylum-seekers.

    Spaces: camps and detention sites

        Zones created in the circulation of political migrants.

    These people are disposessed - people who have to leave their homes because
    it's dangerous to stay, either because of violence or political oppression.

    We will discuss how this affected international law on human rights in the
    20th century.

    Contradiction raised - who has access to human rights?

        Human rights are restricted for the "stateless".

    Like migrant labour, refugees are also produced through specific actions and
    policies.

        e.g.

            - War
            - People who resist development
            - People who avoid labour situations in the global south
            - People avoiding hunger
            - People avoiding unlivable conditions

    In 2015, there was an estimated 50 million refugees worldwide.

    Quote - Hannah Arendt

        Wrote about totalitarianism and the holocaust.

        The Origins of Totalitarianism, 1951, p279:

        "... well-meaning idealists who stubbornly insist on regarding as
         inaliable, ..., but those are only enjoyed by citizens of only the
         most prosperous countries, ..."

        There is a discrepancy between the "inaliable" human rights and the
        lack of rights for those without a state.

        "... the internment camp has become the routine solution for the problem
         of domicile of the 'displaced persons'"

    It's in this context that the UN was created (1944) after the failed League
    of Nations (which was partially because of a lack of support from the US).

    UN structure:

        General assembly - each state has one vote

        Other committees and bodies (UNESCO, committee on refugees)

        Security council - 5 permanent members (US, Russia, France, China) and
        10 non-permanent members; permanent members have veto power on all
        council decisions.

            "During the cold war, the US and Russia veto'd each other for 50
             years, and the security council couldn't do anything!"

    Neuremberg warcrimes trials against German administration created a new body
    of international law saying that states weren't above human rights and
    humanity - international crimes such as genocide are always illegal under
    international law and anyone could be prosecuted for it on an international
    level.

    1948 - UN created the universal declaration of human rights.

        Universal rights to life, liberty, economic well being,
        self-determination of nations.

        Declaration of human rights and mobility:

            Article 13(1) right to freedom of movement and residence within the
            borders of each state; (2) right to leave any country and return to
            his country.

            Article 14(1) Everyone has a right to seek and enjoy asylum from
            persecution in other countries

            Article 15(1) Everyone has a right to a nationality - nobody should
            be deproved of his nationality nor denied the right to change his
            nationality.

            => "Every country is responsible for refugees."

            "Only applies to when your life is in danger, not necessarily just
             your well-being."

            UNHRC - UN High Commission on Refugees (1950)

    People like Hannah Arendt were not convinced - how is this declaration
    enforced?

    The problem with rights is that they must be claimed.

        The right to live in a country or to speak freely is claimed from
        somebody, i.e. a state.

        "I want my state to let me speak freely."

        Inaliable human rights, however, can be claimed globally, but this
        doesn't avoid the problem of stateless people not being able to claim
        rights within any given state.

        If a state refuses responsibility, then universal rights are pointless.

    This led to the problem of "the right to have rights", or the rights to be
    recognized as a rights-bearing member of a certain state.

        Arendt - the only right that all of us should share equally is the right
        to be a citizen and be able to claim rights.

        The UN declaration doesn't do anything about this.

    Global detention

        Pictures: Detention camps and refugee sites around the world.

Dadaab Refugee Camp, Kenya

    1992-present

    Tent facility

    Administered by the UN

    Trend surrounding violence in modern times - the primary casualties of war
    are civilians (90% of casualties of war since WWII have been civilian).

    Services of the camp are provided by NGOs - CARE, Doctors Without Borders,
    etc.

    "Camps are commonly co-administered by the UN high council and social
     service NGOs."

    UNHCR - UN High Council on Refugees (?)

    These are known as "planned camps".

    Initially set up to be temporary residences, but have become permanent
    fixtures or even de-facto cities - small businesses created within, etc.

    So the 150000 people living in these camps are permanently stateless.

    They can't return to their own state, but Kenya hasn't accepted them as
    citizens, so they are in a state of limbo.

    Most refugees and displaced people actually settle in the global south.

    Who are responsible for refugees?

        By and large it is countries in the global south.

    The number of refugees, and the number of refugees in planned camps, has
    increased since the end of the cold war.

        1969 - 16 million
        2006 - 33 million

    Over 50% of these refugees are under the age of 18, and are mostly women.
    
    The spatial isolation of the camps from the neighbouring societies has made
    them isolated from the economies of the host country. So, they become more
    and more dependant on aid organizations. This creates a vicious cycle of
    dependence.

    e.g. The world food organization has had a difficult time raising money to
    feed all of these refugees.

    Dadaab and the 'War on Terror' - stigmitizing refugees.

        Camps are seen as sources of criminal activities.

        e.g.

            Militant terrorist attack in Kenya killing 148 people.

            Government threated to move the camp into Somalia or just shut the
            campt down - it argued that the camp itself was a staging ground for
            the terrorist attack - even though this was proven false.

    Key points:

        Camps are key places to see the affects of mobility

        Refugee camps have become permanent features of many parts of the global
        south.

        Intersecting with the war on terror and stigmitization of people who
        have been displaced.

        What does building walls around countries like Kenya say to the
        'universal' right to human rights?

Example: Offshore Detention, Australia

    Australia has strict borders - it's an island.

    Refugees and asylum-seekers are put on an island.

    Australian public has a negative, stigmitizing, criminalizing view of
    asylum-seekers.

    Unexpected refugees are known as "illegal arrivants".

    They say they are protecting their right to choose who claims asylum in
    their country.

    1992 - government instituted a plan of mandatory detention

        All unauthorized arrivals must be detained.

    "The Pacific Solution" 2001-2007

    Offshoring is still Australia's method for managing asylum-seekers.

    President said, "asylum-seekers who arrive without a visa would never settle
    in Australia".

    Detention centres are constructed like prisons, and administered by private
    security contractors; workers are traumatized by what they see.

    Humanitarian vs Social Justice

        Humanitarian: "How can a human being be illegal?" - Elie Wiesel

        Scholarly and political activism - argues that humanitarian approach
        isn't enough. With all of the humanitarian work being done, the problem
        has only gotten bigger, so maybe that approach isn't sufficient.

        The social justice approach says that the humanitarian approach doesn't
        handle how societies taking on refugees are too overburdoned to deal
        with the burdon of refugees. Countries have a responsibility to deal
        with refugees, but how does that get accomplished?
        How do people get displaced? Are systemic injustices producing refugees
        being addressed?
        The complicity and benefit drawn by developed countries by war and
        displacement.

        The Canadian-Australian mining company Pacific Rim is sueing the
        government of El Salvador for $300M fo denying them the right to setup
        a mine in El Salvador.

        Canadian mining companies were funding paramilitaries in Columbia in
        order to intimidate peasants/protestors - created refugees.

        Does the Canadian government have a responsibility towards refugee
        claimants from those refugees in central america?

        Is there a place for "justice" in refugee re-settlement? For the harm
        being caused by companies originating in the global north?

Next week - one more case study of this, no reading, no specific topic, some
catching up/review.

Still tutorials next week.

