Exam Format

    Short answer - giving the significance of 5 terms (one from each list; 5
    lists of 4 terms each)

    General knowledge of a wide breadth of lecture topics.

    “Defining the significance” only requires 2-3 sentences.

    Graded out of 6 marks; 2 for identifying the term and 4 for giving its
    significance (importance, why does it matter, relation to mobility and
    other key course concepts)

    Terms covered are from the lecture, not from the readings.

    Essay questions - answer two of the five essay questions

    Two medium-length essay questions.

    “Medium-length” => two single-spaced pieces of writing total; 500-750 words
    each.

    Questions themselves will be focused on a particular theme of the course;
    calls for a more in-depth understanding of particular course topics.

    e.g. Migration, security, political economy, etc. “Things we spent two or
    more lectures on.”

    Graded out of 35 each

    Introduction, conclusion, and body paragraphs are required.

    Less thesis-based and more description-of-problem based.

    Points for structure and focus on answering the question; don’t puke out
    everything you know about a specific theme.

    Must bring in points from readings and lectures in order to do very well.

    Can still pass without reading materials.

    No need to cite lectures.

    Can’t use outside sources!

    Not expected to use in-text citations; simply identify the reading you are
    drawing from as much as you can.

    “As the reading about _____ says, …”

    Exam is accumulative! It covers everything.

How to Study for the Exam

    Notes and take-home points; what the message/point of lectures were.

    Readings - where do they connect to the lecture material? “Connect the
    dots.”

    Stop studying at some point and sleep and eat before the exam.

    Email prof questions.

Tips for Writing

    Answer questions in the order that works for you - make sure to label them!

    Make a plan (essay outline) before you start.

    You can use personal pronouns, but make opinions based mainly on
    lectures/readings.

    Write clearly, in direct and straightforward language. “Penmanship
    matters.”

    Double spacing is optional.

    Writing should speak for itself; don’t be vague.

    The goal of an exam question is to invoke a response that demonstrates
    knowledge of intended course lessons. “Demonstrate that you know things to
    me.”

    Can you answer using multiple materials?

Content Review

Neoliberalism (Definition!)

    Deregulation

    Elimination of trade barriers

    Privatization of state-run industries or services

    Elimination/reduction in social spending

    Clawing back labour rights/union-busting

    Dominant economic model today

    Key complaint against 1970s political economy: too much interference of the
    state in the economy

    Had effects in the global north (developed world) and on the global south
    (developing world)

    Tied to globalization (first lecture). Since the end of the cold war,
    neoliberal economic models have become global. Before, there were competing
    economic models (capitalism and command economy). After the cold war,
    capitalism “wins” and neoliberalism becomes dominant in the global economy.
    Economic activity is now driven by the imperatives of reducing state
    influence.

    Neoliberalism is a form of capitalism.

    Embedded liberalism = Breton Woods - compromise between state institutions
    and free market, regulating the free market; gets replaced by neoliberalism
    - a complete rejection of state interference.

What does neoliberalism look like? (Significance!)
    
    Deregulation, Just-in-Time production
    
    Structural Adjustment policies (state-run development projects), shift
    towards export-oriented development (higher production, free trade zones,
    and more exports) “the global factory” “race to the bottom” “logistics keep
    things flowing”.

    Financialization
    
        A part of the shift towards neoliberalism (deregulation of banking
        sector led to rising importance of financial institutions in the global
        economy).
        
        Increased importance of finance, insurance, and real estate to the
        economy and the gearing of economic activity towards financial goals
        (ie shareholder value).
        
        Concentration of power and wealth in New York, London.

    Financialization and the Corporation
    
        Decisions geared towards stock value and shareholder value.
        
        Relying on purchasing financial services.
        
        Shifting of profits across borders as a way to evade taxes.
        
        “Are there going to be short-term gains in the value of this
        corporation?” more commonly asked than “Is this corporation effective
        in the long run?”.

Tourism

    What are the costs and benefits of organizing tourism?
    
    What’s the cost of resorts, conservation areas, etc.
    
    Masai case study - conservation sites designed around the idea that nature
    preservation implies a lack of humans, even spaces that are inhabited by
    humans previously.

    Mobility of resource extraction sites


Borders
    
    e.g. Akwesasne natives contesting sovereignty over borders

    Note: Mobility isn’t necessarily a bad thing - it just has some problems.

