


Reminder: Clear research paper topic by june 23rd (on paper). Talk about which
details/questions/topic you will explore.

Assignment clarification:
    "Structure" of the character in the film around mobility.

We do need a bibliography, including a citation of the film, internal
citations of the lectures (by date), and any additional readings.

Summary from last week:

    "Economic workers", or migrant workers.

    The type of displacement being created in rurual areas is creating a pool
    of migrant labour for factory work.

    Export-oriented development demands this labour pool.

    China, Mexico pushing people off their land and into factories.

    By keeping a distinction between rural and urban citizens, countries keep
    the labour forces distinct, whereas migrant workers do not get the same
    rights and are seen as dispensible labour.

    Either stay in your country, or migrate to the Americas as an undocumented
    worker without any benefits or labour rights.

    Canada has been shifting towards "temporary" migrant programs.
    Migrants are given seasonal visas and have less of an ability to claim
    labour rights as other Canadians do, as they are excluded from applying for
    permanent residency.
    This is similar to the situation in China - migrant workers are still
    subject to a "border" between their home country and the country that they
    are working in.

    So migrant workers are very disposable.

    Migrant workers are the flipside of transnational outsourcing - they become
    migrants because they are necessary for the export-oriented economy (in
    factories, American farms).

    NAFTA

        Debt crisis in Mexico

        Subsidized land holdings

        Mexican government needed a loan from the IMF in order to make its
        payments.

        IMF took on a new role - placing conditions on the loan - structural
        adjustment - that changed the way the Mexican government worked.
        It adjusted spending, reduced corn subsidies, and opened Mexico up to
        free trade (between Mexico, US, Canada -- NAFTA!).
        So Mexico was flooded with American corn, farmers couldn't compete, and
        these workers were displaced from their land.
        Also led to a reform of indigenous land rights that displaced people.
        These people couldn't live off land anymore, and had to move to cities.

        Mexico was spending a lot less on internal industrial development, and
        became less self-reliant.

        Mexico spent more money in the "maquilas"(?), export-oriented labour
        capitals.

        No more Mexican industries to employ people. Only factories meant to
        create exported goods.

Political Migrants

    Refugees, asylum-seekers.

    Spaces: camps and detention sites

        Zones created in the circulation of political migrants.

    These people are disposessed - people who have to leave their homes because
    it's dangerous to stay, either because of violence or political oppression.

    We will discuss how this affected international law on human rights in the
    20th century.

    Contradiction raised - who has access to human rights?

        Human rights are restricted for the "stateless".

    Like migrant labour, refugees are also produced through specific actions and
    policies.

        e.g.

            - War
            - People who resist development
            - People who avoid labour situations in the global south
            - People avoiding hunger
            - People avoiding unlivable conditions

    In 2015, there was an estimated 50 million refugees worldwide.

    Quote - Hannah Arendt

        Wrote about totalitarianism and the holocaust.

        The Origins of Totalitarianism, 1951, p279:

        "... well-meaning idealists who stubbornly insist on regarding as
         inaliable, ..., but those are only enjoyed by citizens of only the
         most prosperous countries, ..."

        There is a discrepancy between the "inaliable" human rights and the
        lack of rights for those without a state.

        "... the internment camp has become the routine solution for the problem
         of domicile of the 'displaced persons'"

    It's in this context that the UN was created (1944) after the failed League
    of Nations (which was partially because of a lack of support from the US).

    UN structure:

        General assembly - each state has one vote

        Other committees and bodies (UNESCO, committee on refugees)

        Security council - 5 permanent members (US, Russia, France, China) and
        10 non-permanent members; permanent members have veto power on all
        council decisions.

            "During the cold war, the US and Russia veto'd each other for 50
             years, and the security council couldn't do anything!"

    Neuremberg warcrimes trials against German administration created a new body
    of international law saying that states weren't above human rights and
    humanity - international crimes such as genocide are always illegal under
    international law and anyone could be prosecuted for it on an international
    level.

    1948 - UN created the universal declaration of human rights.

        Universal rights to life, liberty, economic well being,
        self-determination of nations.

        Declaration of human rights and mobility:

            Article 13(1) right to freedom of movement and residence within the
            borders of each state; (2) right to leave any country and return to
            his country.

            Article 14(1) Everyone has a right to seek and enjoy asylum from
            persecution in other countries

            Article 15(1) Everyone has a right to a nationality - nobody should
            be deproved of his nationality nor denied the right to change his
            nationality.

            => "Every country is responsible for refugees."

            "Only applies to when your life is in danger, not necessarily just
             your well-being."

            UNHRC - UN High Commission on Refugees (1950)

    People like Hannah Arendt were not convinced - how is this declaration
    enforced?

    The problem with rights is that they must be claimed.

        The right to live in a country or to speak freely is claimed from
        somebody, i.e. a state.

        "I want my state to let me speak freely."

        Inaliable human rights, however, can be claimed globally, but this
        doesn't avoid the problem of stateless people not being able to claim
        rights within any given state.

        If a state refuses responsibility, then universal rights are pointless.

    This led to the problem of "the right to have rights", or the rights to be
    recognized as a rights-bearing member of a certain state.

        Arendt - the only right that all of us should share equally is the right
        to be a citizen and be able to claim rights.

        The UN declaration doesn't do anything about this.

    Global detention

        Pictures: Detention camps and refugee sites around the world.

Dadaab Refugee Camp, Kenya

    1992-present

    Tent facility

    Administered by the UN

    Trend surrounding violence in modern times - the primary casualties of war
    are civilians (90% of casualties of war since WWII have been civilian).

    Services of the camp are provided by NGOs - CARE, Doctors Without Borders,
    etc.

    "Camps are commonly co-administered by the UN high council and social
     service NGOs."

    UNHCR - UN High Council on Refugees (?)

    These are known as "planned camps".

    Initially set up to be temporary residences, but have become permanent
    fixtures or even de-facto cities - small businesses created within, etc.

    So the 150000 people living in these camps are permanently stateless.

    They can't return to their own state, but Kenya hasn't accepted them as
    citizens, so they are in a state of limbo.

    Most refugees and displaced people actually settle in the global south.

    Who are responsible for refugees?

        By and large it is countries in the global south.

    The number of refugees, and the number of refugees in planned camps, has
    increased since the end of the cold war.

        1969 - 16 million
        2006 - 33 million

    Over 50% of these refugees are under the age of 18, and are mostly women.
    
    The spatial isolation of the camps from the neighbouring societies has made
    them isolated from the economies of the host country. So, they become more
    and more dependant on aid organizations. This creates a vicious cycle of
    dependence.

    e.g. The world food organization has had a difficult time raising money to
    feed all of these refugees.

    Dadaab and the 'War on Terror' - stigmitizing refugees.

        Camps are seen as sources of criminal activities.

        e.g.

            Militant terrorist attack in Kenya killing 148 people.

            Government threated to move the camp into Somalia or just shut the
            campt down - it argued that the camp itself was a staging ground for
            the terrorist attack - even though this was proven false.

    Key points:

        Camps are key places to see the affects of mobility

        Refugee camps have become permanent features of many parts of the global
        south.

        Intersecting with the war on terror and stigmitization of people who
        have been displaced.

        What does building walls around countries like Kenya say to the
        'universal' right to human rights?

Example: Offshore Detention, Australia

    Australia has strict borders - it's an island.

    Refugees and asylum-seekers are put on an island.

    Australian public has a negative, stigmitizing, criminalizing view of
    asylum-seekers.

    Unexpected refugees are known as "illegal arrivants".

    They say they are protecting their right to choose who claims asylum in
    their country.

    1992 - government instituted a plan of mandatory detention

        All unauthorized arrivals must be detained.

    "The Pacific Solution" 2001-2007

    Offshoring is still Australia's method for managing asylum-seekers.

    President said, "asylum-seekers who arrive without a visa would never settle
    in Australia".

    Detention centres are constructed like prisons, and administered by private
    security contractors; workers are traumatized by what they see.

    Humanitarian vs Social Justice

        Humanitarian: "How can a human being be illegal?" - Elie Wiesel

        Scholarly and political activism - argues that humanitarian approach
        isn't enough. With all of the humanitarian work being done, the problem
        has only gotten bigger, so maybe that approach isn't sufficient.

        The social justice approach says that the humanitarian approach doesn't
        handle how societies taking on refugees are too overburdoned to deal
        with the burdon of refugees. Countries have a responsibility to deal
        with refugees, but how does that get accomplished?
        How do people get displaced? Are systemic injustices producing refugees
        being addressed?
        The complicity and benefit drawn by developed countries by war and
        displacement.

        The Canadian-Australian mining company Pacific Rim is sueing the
        government of El Salvador for $300M fo denying them the right to setup
        a mine in El Salvador.

        Canadian mining companies were funding paramilitaries in Columbia in
        order to intimidate peasants/protestors - created refugees.

        Does the Canadian government have a responsibility towards refugee
        claimants from those refugees in central america?

        Is there a place for "justice" in refugee re-settlement? For the harm
        being caused by companies originating in the global north?

Next week - one more case study of this, no reading, no specific topic, some
catching up/review.

Still tutorials next week.

