Lecture 2 May 12 2015

The nation state may not be a good starting point for international studies.
Mobility can be a better starting point.

We tend to see the world as a map of independent nation-states.
However, we have a long history of change, mobility, conquering and being
conquered.

This lecture will be focused on international history through mobility.
In particular, colonialism.

    e.g.
        
        Movement, exploration, and distribution of wealth.

Nation state has only been around since 18th or 19th century, so the
idea of "international" is only that old.

Contemporary conflicts are often the result of tension regarding who can travel
where.

15th century trade routes - Indian Ocean
There is nothing new about people travelling long distances and conflicting,
conquering, or pillaging with people in other locations.

What is colonialism?
We tend to date 1492, the year that Christopher Columbus bumped into
North America when looking for India.

Three aspects of American colonialism that made it stand out:

    1. Scale

        Large amount of violence and genocide
        50-100 million lived in the Americas prior to the Spanish Europeans
        arriving. 50-90% of those people died, due to disease, forced labour,
        or intentional kiling.

        Why?

        Ideological differences, technological advantages, differing immunities
        for diseases.

        African slave trade (map: 1500-1870) was also large.
        Slavery was not new, but the slavery in the 16th century was on a
        whole different scale. 9-11 million people were enslaved, mainly from
        Africa to South America (to work on plantations).

        Chattel slavery - en-masse taking of people, indiscriminantly, from
        one part to another for a specific purpose.

    2. Scientific Racism

        Discrimination is not new for humans, but european colonialism truly
        became racism, based on categorizing people by scientific categories
        based on racial characteristics.

        These characteristics became linked to biology.
        Western europeans became privileged with positive characteristics, while
        others became associated with negative characteristics. These negative
        characteristics were used to justify slavery.

        In the past, slavery was justified by political means, like losing a
        war. Now it's justified by physical/intellectual inferiority.

        Phrenologist - specialist in measuring peoples' heads.
        European head shapes became more associated with intellectual prowess,
        etc.

        "The White Man's Burden" a responsibility to civilize others.
        Pear soap ads discussing "brightening dark corners of the earth".

        The ancient greeks used terms such as "civilized" and "barbaric" to
        differentiate from Greek and non-Greek.

        European colonialists, however, became about changing the other
        cultures.

        Residential schools interfered with people's lives in intimate ways.
            e.g. hygiene

    3. Accumulation and Production

        Economic system that became known as capitalism.

        It's easy to look at capitalism and assume it's a universal thing, but,
        like the nation-state, it's a relatively new invention.

        Capitalism could not have happened without colonialism, because it
        relies on overproduction.

        Previous to capitalism, what was produced was only what's necessary to
        live, for social reproduction.
        
        Social reproduction - having kids, raising them, etc.

        Early forms of colonialism (when Spanish and Portugese went to the
        Americas) discovered many riches (gold, etc.) and took them from the
        Americas back to Europe.

        Before, the gold was pre-existant and transferred via conquest.

        Goods discovered in the Americas, like fur, were used to create
        excessive goods. These goods were more than what was needed for
        social reproduction.

        More was needed to be produced to ensure that profits could be made by
        the business, so that profits can be re-invested in order to expand.

        That profit-driven system is an essential part of capitalism and
        business.

        This creation of surplus that is used for the sake of creating more
        wealth was a new idea - surplus was traditionally a safeguard for
        disasters, e.g. stockpiles of wheat.

        Prior to this system of capitalism, gold was intrinsically valuable.

        Now with capitalism, gold could be accumulated; wealth could be
        accumulated.

        Hereditary rule was changed into liberalism.

        This required mass amounts of resources to keep going.
        Slide: cotton farm in South America, and a cotton factory in England.

        These changes caused a massive shift in the distribution of wealth in
        society. Wealth was no longer just held by royalty and land-owners, it
        could be held by emerging capitalists and entrepreneurs.

        This led to the rule of law, etc.

        It also created a vast disparity of wealth in the world, larger than
        ever before seen in the world.

        The scale of inequality (concentration of wealth vs poverty) was large.

        A large body of workers in Europe were displaced in order to work in
        city factories, while the owners of the companies became rich with the
        profits.

        Many of these Europeans had to move as a result of these changes, and
        many ended up in the Americas.

        Moving 11 million people from a specific region had a drastic affect on
        the old and new regions.

        Abolition of slavery created a system of indentured labour.
        (Technically considered free, but given over to a company in exchange
        for agreed benefits, e.g. transport to the Americas.)
        
        Some of the tensions in the Carribean today are a result of the
        differences between African slave labour and Indian indentured labour. 

        Readings discuss "diasporas" - people who have moved from one part of
        the world, but maintain a connection to their previous home; they care
        about the politics, families, and events in their home countries.

        We have what scholars call "the development of underdevelopment".
        The poverty that we see today is not the result of regional flaws, but
        rather because of how certain regions were literally underdeveloped.
        The conditions of poverty and inequality were created by the desire for
        accumulated wealth and development. The development of one place relies
        on the underdevelopment of another.
        
        The economy of any one region is clearly related to other regions due to
        the global trade systems created by colonialism.

        Between 16th and 20th centuries, greater wealth and deeper connections
        were created than have ever been seen before. There is a lot of good and
        technological advancement that comes out of this. Universities are
        created, and vast wealth is obtained. On the other hand, we have a
        system that rationalized inequality - it made inequality seem rational
        and inevitable, via scientific racism, capitalism, the civilizing
        mission, and the need to expand wealth. These pursuits made inequality
        seem rational and inevitable.

        The African continent is now seen in the global economy as a region
        where resources are obtained.

What is globalization?

    Picture:

        Democracy -->
        <-- WTO
            
            - Ranforest Action Network

        This banner drop started "The Battle in Seattle" protests.

    What does globalization mean to you?

        - Making the wordl seem smaller
        - Interdependant economies

    Globalization is one of those words thrown around a lot for different
    reasons.

    We will talk about the relationship between colonialism and globalization.

    We refer to globalization as the intermixing of the globe's societies,
    cultures, and ecoomies.
    They aren't necessarily becoming the same things, but rather becoming a
    network that is interdependant.

        e.g. The American economic collapse affecting the entire world.

    After the second world war, we saw the development of the global economy
    and related institutions - the United Nations, the World Bank, the WTO,
    the IMF, etc.

    We also had a rapid expansion of global media following the second world
    war and during the technological growth from the 70s and 80s.

    Two different perspectives on globalization:

        Thomas L. Friedman - "The World is Flat"
            
            "Globalization 3.0 differs from...
             1.0 and 2.0 were driving primarily by European and American
             individuals..."
             Globalization 3.0 makes it possible for more people to get
             involved.

        Arundhati Roy, Indian author and activist

            "I think of globalization like a light which shines brighter on a
             few people and the rest are in darkness, wiped out."

Rise of the nation-state and self-determination

    (Painting celebrating the French Revolution)

    Rapid globalization makes it easier for things to cross borders.
    To Friedman, this makes the world flat and accessible to all.
    To Arundhati, this means some borders are being wiped out.

    As wealth accumulated in Western Europe, they could develop complex
    beaurocracies.

    The rise of capitalism pushed political organization to liberalism, where
    citizens are considered equal and are represented fairly (at least for men,
    initially).

    Wealth is created with entrepreneurial spirit rather tha hereditary wealth.

    These sentiments of equality gave rise to the nation-state, as well as
    sovereignty and self-determination.

    Sovereignty: The concept of a single political authority over a particular
    state, and not by any external authority. Nation-states were autonomous,
    and the sovereign (government, ruler, etc.) was in full control.

    Self-determination was introduced after the first world war (1917, 1918) as
    a concept of each nation being able to determine what they do.

    Decolonization and the Myth of Independance

        Movements using the language of nationalism to assert independance from
        colonial powers.

        Quotes:

            Patrice Lumamba - anti-colonial leader and president of the Congo

            Frantz Fanon - anti-colonial author (?)

        Note: At the end of each lecture, the slides (visuals) will be posted as
        well as brief take-home points of the topics covered.

        A lot of colonies didn't change as a result of decolonization, because
        there was a lack of infrastructure needed for internal
        industrialization - a lot of infrastructure existed only to transport
        goods to ruling nations.
    
        During the cold war, a lot of governments became seen as too unstable to
        remain in power. A lot of corporations located in the developed world
        continued to remain in control of resources (e.g. oil) in colonized
        regions during decolonization.

        Why does this all matter?

        Globalization affects national control over borders, so it is not that
        new at all when we consider all of these things that have happened in
        the past. Corporations coming and going across borders is similar to
        the colonization efforts in, say, sub-saharan Africa.

    Map: Tangled routes of migrants - modern migration around the globe.
    Map: Global income inequality - differences in accumulation of wealth.
    Map: Climate change reshaping water - differences in water availability.
    Map: Cross-border investment - amount of money crossing borders and
         where is is being invested.
         Lots of investment between North America and Europe, but much
         smaller investment in former colonies.
    Map: Purchasing land overseas - countries purchasing land in other
         countries as a means of maintaining food/resource security back
         home. 21st century colonialism?
         Purchasing land instead of taking it.

So what about mobility? 3 contexts:

    1. Unequal ability between different states to control what crosses
       borders.
        
            e.g.

                States in North America and Eastern Europe are increasingly
                restricting their borders from migrants.

            e.g.

                Incresingly militarized borders.

            e.g.

                States in the developing world having a difficult time keeping
                international corporations out; being compelled by the WTO to
                accept international trade.

    2. Continued uneven distribution of wealth.

        Wealth continues to gravitate to certain centers that rely on
        international labour. These centers change - mre recently China, etc.

        Workers are still forcibly relocated to centers of wealth and
        employment.

        This ties back to the concept of diasporas.

            e.g. Workers in Dubai/UAE maintaining ties back to their home
                 countries.

    3. Continued need to respond to violence and displacement.

        Fear of the presence of "hot wars" spreading violence.

        Fear of climate change creating difficult living conditions.

        Increasing fear of the dispossessed - people on the move - created by
        this climate of fear.

            e.g.

                People "swarming" from a certain place due to climate change.

    Note that these contexts and histories should be a good foundational context
    for the think piece assignment due next week.

    Note: Referencing external events is acceptable as long as we relate to the
    themes/contexts discussed in class.

Look at the reading for airport security as a jumping off point in the next
lecture.

