Lecture 4 May 26 2015

Multinationals and Wall Street

Preamble - why is this important?

    How did we get to the point where we have large, multinational corporations
    that are constantly on the lookout for profitable opportunities?

    How did financial institutions and capitals become so important in the
    global economy?

    WalMart had 2 million employees across the world, 1 million of which are in
    the U.S. 80% of their supply is from China.

    McDonalds employs 1.7 million people globally. It's meat supplier, Cargill
    International, has over 170 000 employees.

    Starbucks has over 180 000 employees.

    These are massive institutions and play a big role in the global economy.

Important distinction between an international and transnational corporation.

Post WWII economy - embedded liberalism.
The instability and lack of regulation of the financial sector led to its
collapse. There was also a lack of global economic structure.

The command economy of the soviet union also played a key role in the post-WWII
economy.

A revolutionary and radical labour movement were a big part of the American
economy also played a big role. They fought for labour rights, and often had
Marxist roots that worked against capitalism.

This climate led to embedded liberalism and the Breton Woods system.

Embedded liberalism

    A liberal economic system based on a free market of exchange and production
    without causing the kind of inequality and instability that had
    characterized the first part of the 20th century.

    So embedded liberalism became a compromise.

    They agreed to a system of collective bargaining that limited the union's
    ability to strike. In exchange, unions were provided welfare and help for
    people who could not work.

    Compromise between labour, business, and governments.

    Labour - pull back and use collective bargaining.
    Businesses - agreed to pay high wages.
    Governments - agreed to provide welfare.

    This led to a new system called Keynesianism.

    Capitalism is based on a cycle of booms and busts.
    At this point, government policy adopted the role of mitigating each crisis.

The Bretton Woods System

    The first moment of a new phase of multilateralism - agreements between more
    than two countries to abide by rules and procedures that abide by external
    institutions.

    Sovereignty still applies, but you agree as a sovereign to abide by some
    international rules to abide by.

    The group of people who negotiated this system in 1944 were the victors of
    the second world war (US, UK, not the Soviet Union).

    Created the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
    Originally, WB was IBRD (International Bank of Reconstruction and
    Development).

    Decided on a fixed exchange rate ($1 US == X amount of gold), and all other
    currencies were pegged against that.

    This allowed the US to become economically dominant.

    Discussions of creating a multilateral organization to govern international
    commerce, but it fell through. In its place, GATT was created.

    Global Agreement on Tariffs and Trades

    These institutions created "an even playing field", but there were actually
    a lot of inequalities present.

    The stability provided by this system led to much economic growth in North
    America, and later Europe.

    The Marshall Plan led to an enormous growth in European and Japanese
    economy.

        The European economy was in shambles, and was forced to buy from the US
        and also created a reliance on foreign oil created by American companies
        in the middle east.

    A lot of this growth was reliant on consumerism present in the US and
    Canada. With people earning salaries, there was a larger demand for goods to
    consume. There were also campaigns to get people to be consumers and buy new
    products.

    During the war, women were the predominant workers (in factories), because
    of the demand for ammunitions and the lack of male workforce.

    After the war, women were fired in order to bring back the male workers.

    To deal with this contradiction, national campaigns were created to make
    consumerism a part of the female identity and "entice women back into the
    kitchen".

    The influence of state support and the creation of a consumer society
    allowed American and European corporations to fleurish and expand.

        The big three carmakers
        Iconic corporations were created - IBM, etc.

    So specific policies were put in place to enable the growth of corporations.
    Companies like coca cola was based in a specific country of origin.

        e.g. Coke was produced in the US and sold overseas.

    These companies had an international scope but national profits.

    As it was hard under the Bretton woods agreement to exchange currencies,
    these companies had an incentive to keep production local.

    These are international corporations.

1970s, end of Bretton Woods Agreement and the changing corporations

    The global economy entered into a new crisis in the wake of consumerism.
    Companies felt pressure to expand, along with the high union wages, combined
    with a saturation of the market (not enough consumers) led to a decline in
    profits and expansion.

    Decolonization in the 1960s had created the ability to move production to
    the global south.

    There was also a rise in non-American competition (e.g. Japanese
    corporations). So there was a desire for American companies to maintain
    their competitive advantage.

    When trying to maintain a competitive advantage, the number one thing
    companies do is to reduce labour costs.

    This is the context in which outsourcing and offshoring began.

    Outsourcing - shift production by contracting out to an international
    company instead of paying local workers.

    Offshoring - picking up your company and moving it to another country.

    Both of these processes emerged at this time period.

    We also had the end of the fixed exchange rate after a currency crisis
    in the US, leading them to remove their currency from the gold standard and
    move to a floating exchange rate - all currencies are pegged in relation to
    each other (X$ US == Y$ CAD).

    We also saw the oil crisis in 1973 - a trade embargo put in place by OPEC
    for trade with the US. Overnight, the price of oil in the US skyrocketed.

This crisis in the 1970s, along with offshoring, led to a new economic theory -
Neoliberalism.

    Limiting government interference and moving more government roles into the
    private market.

    The kind of prosperity promised in the 1940s wasn't happening.

    The government policies put in place by Keynesianism wasn't working, and
    some thought this government interference was creating this economic
    downturn.

    A real free market would self-regulate.

    In the 70s and 80s thi caught on with Thatcher in the UK and with Reagan in
    the US.

    Key tenets of Neoliberalism:

        Deregulating markets, especially financial markets (rules put in place
        after 1930).

        Free trade (elimination of trade barriers)

        Privatization of state-run services

        Elimination/reduction of social spending

        Clawing back labour rights; union-busting.

    This led to a massive, orchestrated attack on unions.
    Unionization is currently very rare - only 8% in US and 16% in Canada are
    unionized workers.

    (This is all in the developed world; next week, we will cover what
    neoliberalism looked like for the global south.)

    Shift from international to transnational corporations.

    This time period saw the rise of the ability for corporations to exert more
    control/influence on governments and labour capitals. So the idea of
    attracting corporations with low wages, low taxes, limited restrictions, and
    lax labour laws came to fruition.

    Corporations could exact leverage on governments to get what they want.

    e.g. MegaCorp threatening to move factories out of Mexico
        "Labour Arbitrage", "The race to the bottom"

    Corporations became able to use different working standards against each
    other - battling each other to negotiate the lowest wages.

    This is the kind of capitalism that "won" after WWII.

How do corporations look after neoliberalism?

    One of the dominant features of the older form of capitalism was free trade,
    or reducing local quotas, international taxes and tariffs so that goods can
    be traded freely without government interference.

    Neoliberalism gave rise to the WTO, in contrast to GATT.

    The World Trade Organization

        161 signatory countries, including China (2001).

        Explosion of bilateral trade agreements in 80s/90s, including NAFTA.

        NAFTA was a precursor to a lot of later free trade agreements - a model,
        or a benchmark, for future agreements around the world.

        Recently - creation of the trans-pacific partnership for free trade
        between countries along the pacific rim - China, Japan, Canada, US.
        One of the most extensive free tradea agreements to date.

        WTO is a place to discuss trade relations, agreement, and dispute
        resolution.

        WTO is unique as an international organization with actual penalties by
        not abiding by WTO standards - imposed trade sanctions.

        Criticisms:
            
            Bias towards global north (e.g. production subsidies).
            Fees for using technologyy and medication for global south.
            Questions of sovereignty in the global south.
            Limitations on people crossing borders.

        What characterizes a corporation now:

            Spread out all over the world - production, headquarters, etc. all
            in different places.

            "The disaggregation of the supply chain."

            These supply chains are becoming increasingly dispersed.

            So it's harder for corporations to be held accountable when there
            are contractors and sub-contractors are involved.

        Today, the dominant corporations are retailers (e.g. WalMart, Amazon)
        because they buy so much capital and have so much influence on
        suppliers.

        There is now more room for corporations to rise from non-American
        countries, like the BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China,
        South Africa).

        There is also a "BRICS Bank" that operates like the World Bank, but for
        BRICS countries only (potential research paper topic!).

The Rise of Financialization in the 1980s

    "This conversation could get really technical."

    Recall how deregulation of financial industries was an important piece of
    neoliberalism.

        e.g. 1990s repeal of Glass Steagles Act that kept commercial banks and
        securities firm separate.

    Some say the overturning of that legislation was key to the 2008 crisis.

    An increased portion of the economy became dedicated to insurace,
    realestate, and investment work.

    Economic activity became geared towards financial gain and financial goals.
    Wealth production was being moved away from the production of actual goods
    to the valuation of stock and currencies.

    So all of the circulation of wealth passes through large financial sectors,
    particularly in New York and London.

    Financialization and Corporations

        Decisions geared towards stocks, shareholder value.

        Relying on purchasing financial services.

        Shifting of profits across borders as a way to evade taxes.

    The objective of the corporation has been narrowed to increasing stock
    value.

        e.g. A company like WalMart isn't valued by its total assets or total
        sales, but by how those things combine to increase stock value in any
        given day.

        Relocation, etc. is encouraged if it increases the stock price,
        regardless or long-term affects.

        Executive salaries fluctate based on stock price; corporate executives
        now have incentives to create short-term gains for the company.

        This has an enormous impact on how states interact with corporations.
        Incentives are now focused on what they will do for today's stock price.

    Corporations are now increasingly reliant on purchasing financial services
    from financial centers.

    Corporations are not only shifting production across borders, they are
    shifting their finances across borders in order to evade taxes.

        Financial firms are now managing tax avoidance for different
        corporations, in addition to circulating investments.

        So, it becomes hard to follow the money in corporations and hold
        companies accountable due to the disaggregation and financialization of
        the corporation.

Big takeaway:

    None of this is natural of inevitable in the global economy.
    The way corporations look today aren't natural occurences.
    It took national agreements, legislation, defeating unions, legal
    arrangements for taxes and finance, and the defeat of liberalism in order to
    ceate this mobility of corporations.

    It doesn't operate this way because of the free market, but actually because
    of a complex array of regulation, arrangements and benefits afforded by
    governments to corporations.

    Film "Margin Call" is a fictionalized account of what happened in the 2008
    financial crisis from an internal view.

Take home points posted on LEARN!
