International Studies 101

Kraven (Karen) from McMaster
New to Waterloo and Inst101

Good intro to Poli Sci / Intst minors but open to all

A lot of different perspectives to be applied to the world.
No textbook!
"No one answer to many questions posed."

Holistic approach to global issues.

This course won't cover everything, but it will be as diverse in
themes as possible.

Each year has a different theme - previously war, inequality.
This year - mobility.

Mobility is how people, things, ideas, and systems cross borders.
How do power, trade, relationships, trade, poverty, affect this?

Lectures are designed around places that are defined by how ideas
and people move through them.

    e.g. 2nd lecture on airports and border security.
        How has the war on terror affected movement?

    e.g. Wallstreet, the largest stock exchange in the world.
        Defined by how capital moves through it.
        How is the global economy affected.

    Other topics include:

        Camps and detention sites (refugees).

        Bases and blacksites (war)

        Resort, safari, and village (tourism)

        Amazon and tar sands (environmental politics, resource extraction)

141 students registered for this class! (Room capacity is ~150)

The rest of this lecture will discuss logistics of the course.
    * McMaster Avenue to Learn == Waterloo LEARN

"Changes in copyright law that allows me to post content in closed course
website."

All the readings are posted. Readings aren't tracked online.
Book chapters are also available through library reserves.
Journal articles are available through the library journal system.

One reading per week, fairly short.
"A tease or example for each weekly topic."

    e.g. Airport article discussing border security in U.S. aviation.

Readings are expected and will be on the exam.

Readings are specific, lectures are more broad.

So a final exam essay can draw from the readings as examples.
"You won't be able to pass the course without coming to class and doing the
readings."

International news sources are posted for contemporary examples.
    
    e.g. Labour start, Upside down world

Tutorials worth 15% (10% participation, 5% attendance)
"An easy fifteen percent, just show up and talk about content."

No tutorials today! They will start next week.

On participation - are you talking about course material, or just random
current events? Are you furthering the discussion with your comments or are
you limiting it / ending it?

Tutorial TA isn't necessarily our marker.

First year course with lots of writing, so some tutorials are devoted to
writing skills (e.g. academic citations, research question creation,
db searching).

First assignment - "A think piece on mobility"
    Due in two weeks (May 19).
    Not a research paper.
    2-3 pages double spaced.
    Just a reflection on your position!
    Consider your own stories of mobility, as well as themes introduced next
    week.
    Essay format, but not necessarily a thesis and cited sources.

Other assignments will be:
    Film review - watch a fictional movie related to mobility,
    and write a critical response to it with regards to our course themes.

        Suggested films are oscar-winners, many non-english.

    Research paper - based on one of the topic weeks (3-5, 8-11) of the class.
        
        Pick a week that interests you the most, and do your own research on a
        question raised by that discussion for you.

        Create a research question, clear the topic by June 23, and do research
        outside of the assigned readings.
        "Cleared in writing by me or by a TA by June 23."

Cumulative final exam (Date TBA) draws on entire course contents.

Last lecture is July 21, which is two weeks before the exam period starts.

Prof lives in Hamilton, so TAs might organize a review session in the two weeks
before exams.

"You may wish to skip class and go to the beach, but there's probably no beach
in Waterloo, is there?" :P

"Slides used to aid visual learners, but not for notes."

Take-home points from each lecture will be posted online.

Contact info:
    ccraven@uwaterloo.ca "I answer emails whenever."
    Only on-campus on Tuesdays.
    Office hours Tusdays 2:30-4pm, HH 340
