Lecture June 16 INTST 101

Canada’s Deportation Regime

Refugees who are denied citizenship in Canada but can’t return to their home country are placed in detention. Detention should only be 90 days long but can be indefinite. Even though Canada has a reputation for being a welcoming country, claimants can be treated poorly.

There is a lot of truth to Canada’s reputation in supporting refugees, but in a lot of ways it’s a myth due to many contradictions. The motivations for accepting/rejecting refugees come from political reasons. This decision is at the intersection of international conflicts and international decisions. The pre-1970s immigration system in Canada was very racist - Chinese head tax to exclude Chinese immigrants, Japanese internment camps, etc. After WWII it changed to a points-based system (it has since changed). There are administrative barriers that exist still, especially non-economic migrants and migrants from the global south.

Deportation has been used to remove people who were deemed “unwanted”; people labelled as labour union agitators, social agitators, etc.
1960s deportation raid
TV show Border Security is an example of a deportation raid

1973 - immigration closed
1979 - immigration opened up again, many refugees from southeast asia, 25% of immigrants to Canada were refugees

By the 1980s and 1990s refugee’s home countries shifted from eastern europe (communist countries) to the global south. Much conflict in those reasons were the result of Cold War politics (Kosavar, etc.)

UNHCR had Canada accept 5000 refugees
UNHCR has had a similar response to Syria - has taken 1500/13000 refugees from Syria

Long trend of contradictory refugee relations in Canada

Shifted from a system of permanent immigration to temporary immigration

2008 - first year where the number of temporary migrants surpassed the number of permanent migrants

Anyone born in Canada is automatically a citizen - but the Canadian government has recently reversed this, discouraging refugees

2012 - lowest number of refugees in ~30 years according to canadian council on refugees
Designated country of origin policy - foreign minister declared list of countries said to not produce refugees. If you come from a country on the designated country of origin list, and you claim refugee status from that country, the claimant has a shorter process and have no chance for appeal.
e.g. Norway (duh)
But also Mexico, Hungary (!)

There are a number of policies like this for refugee claimants. Country of origin policy has created a two-tier system - non-designated countries have better chances of being accepted as refugees

Re-emergence of “bogus refugee claimants”, i.e. high profile cases of boats arriving in Vancouver from Sri Lanka containing refugees said to be making illegitimate claims. Researchers scrutinized the refugee board for using this identifier to exclude a whole group of people (Alison Mountz).

Large number of political dissidents from China filing for refugee status; Canada denied many of these claims on the basis of being bogus and asked China to take them back. Some speculated that this would be embarrassing to both countries’ trade relations. It would be bad to acknowledge that your trade partner is oppressing people.

Hungary pressured EU to pressure Canada to not accept Roma refugees from Eastern Europe. Canada was pressured to ignore the existence of political repression of the Roma people.

No evidence to support the “bogus” aspect of claimants, but that word has a powerful pull for Canada. It’s an emotionally powerful term but has little factual evidence. Many Canadians believe that refugee applicants who aren’t approved aren’t “real” refugees, but this process actually can be influenced by many subjective factors. Claimants must recount deeply personal/traumatic experiences repeatedly, and must remain consistent in their retellings. Legal aid doesn’t have enough funding to support all claimants - no equal access to legal assistance or translators across the board.

Recall: Hannah Arendt quote about stateless people normally being placed in internment camps, usually untrained people of colour. Who is actually allowed to experience human rights?

Do categories like the bogus refugee system create a new form of discrimination?

Recall: Distinction between humanitarian and social justice positions both trying to respond to the refugee crisis that exists in the world today (at least 17 million externally displaced, 50 million total displaced people).
Humanitarians say all people deserve to be treated with dignity, even those applying for asylum. All people deserve to be treated with dignity even if they are denied their claim (international law).
Social justice perspective says the humanitarian perspective doesn’t go far enough to address the way in which receiving countries are complicit in the kinds of economic and political oppression in the global south. Who’s responsible? How many refugees are going to be settled in the global north if the global north is benefiting from the source of the displacement? (Power dynamics - who is benefiting from displacement.)

Usually when a claim is denied, you are issued a removal order, unless your home country is too dangerous - in which case you can be put in detention (esp. if they committed a crime pre-migration).

2014 - Canada changed law so that newborn immigrants are not automatically citizens.

Mid Term Review

6 weeks of lectures done!

Starting points
Mobility of people, things, ideas, structures over interstate relations
international system that is a product of colonialism, imperialism, nationalism, nationalism/self-determination, and globalization
a product of periods of movement of people, things, and ideas
Colonialism’s three big, lasting impacts: scale, system of racism, capitalism

Globalization
A period of time, but also a process of accelerated movement of people and things around the world
Political, economic, and social integration around the world
Increasing concerns about the ability to control borders
Who has even actually had this control?
Conflict between capitalist systems and command-economy systems gave way to a more unified capitalist approach, which caused more concerns about border control as trade/travel increased dramatically
Who or what comes in or out?
Prior to 1989, places in the world that were colonized clearly didn’t have the same amount of control over their borders as those countries that did the colonizing
Concerns around currency, immigration, etc. nowadays emanate from countries in the global north who have control of their borders
Countries of the global south don’t really have such control - TNCs, like colonial governments, can settle in the global south without much difficulty

Next section of the course split into border security and global politics.

Security and Borders
Shift from cold war security thinking (containment of communism in 1969) to risk management thinking
Increased integration has led to increased vulnerability, whether those are intentional or not
Increased risk of disruption of non-state actors
Power executed through borders - Akwisasne “borders used as tools of resistance”
Rights and security: privacy and refugee rights
Post-9/11 “war on terror” reshaped airport security - biometrics, racial profiling, pre-clearance
Security apparatus extends outside of home country, and extends more deeply into our identity via data collection, and extends into our racial traits for the sake of risk calculation - this leads to profiling
Securitization of refugee camps - Kenya camp being criminalized and seen as a threat, so the camp was increasingly militarized or threatened to move
Criminalization of refugees/displaced people
Asylum-seekers being treated like criminals - even in Canada
Use of detention facilities in Australia - security guard’s story - facility manufactured by military, and employee training emphasizes criminalization

Continuity of Global Racial and Geographic Inequalities

Uncivilized?
scientific racism, civilizing missions

Underdeveloped?
structural adjustment policies’ talk of “irresponsible third world governments”, needed assistance to “bring democracy to the people”
lots of correlation between who is seen as underdeveloped and those who were seen as uncivilized in colonial times

Security threat?
The dispossessed as terrorist
Even those who are avoiding climate conditions

Racial discourse of difference creates inequality on an international scale - there is a lot of continuity as the world changed - inequality has remained constant but just labelled in different ways.



Mobility and the Global Economy

Capital
International → transnational corporation
Embedded liberalism and Bretton woods → Neoliberalism
Neoliberalism looks like a push for export-oriented development
Deregulation, privatization, export-oriented development in the global south
Race to the bottom - competing with all other countries in this position by keeping wages and labour regulations as low as possible - AKA labour arbitrage
Financialization
Changed the makeup of where power is located in the world
Financial hubs like NY and London became hubs of power and welath

Workers
Deindustrialization, outsourcing
Export-oriented development = race to the bottom
Rural displacement - less living in small agricultural communities and more city living
Large pool of migrant labour creates
Temporary and undocumented migrants seen as disposable and exploitable

Note: International countries are based in one country but sell to many; transnational corporations are based in many countries and can sell to many countries (seeking low labour regulations, etc.)

Note: Non-state actors means individuals or groups that may want to disrupt a state. e.g. Criminal organizations or terrorists who have the power to affect nation-states but are globally integrated.

Where are we going?
Bases and Blacksites → ‘new’ militarism and ‘empire’
Logistics → how does this global trade actually work? How can you order something online in another country and get it so quickly? Whose work is going into this?
Tourism → travel as an industry and a ‘right’
The Amazon and the Tar Sands → environmentalism and resource extraction in the 21st century, particularly how they affect indigenous rights for those in Canada, Brazil

We will do a similar review at the end of the course!

