Bases and Blacksites

We’ve looked at integration - economic, political, etc. - but we also have a
more globally integrated military network, along with multi/bilateral
agreements to support them.

NATO - formed in aftermath of second world war, designed to be an agreement
between western nations against soviet nations. It has since expanded to a
global security network, but still dominated by U.S. and western/European
forces.

NATO led into Kosovo, Libya in 2011

US spending on military far outweighs all others - US is 48% of global military
relations.

US also has an extensive (>900) collection of military bases; owns/rents over
1mil acres around the world; 200000 people stationed.

These bases are largely permanent; places experience long-term relations with
US military.

It’s not uncommon for places to have US military personnel stationed nearby.

In terms of social structure, look at the military as a social institution. War
is deeply embedded in production, our ideologies, nationalism, and citizenship
- from childhood to video games to sports.

US president’s proposed discretionary spending, fiscal year 2015 - Military 55%
of budget

Many countries have mandatory military service as a requirement for
citizenship; people who aren’t citizens can also sometimes enlist in order to
gain future citizenship.

The infrastructure for war has long-lasting effects.

What are bases?

    The proliferation of US bases really started post-WWII.

    A military post either on domestic or foreign territory that stations
    personnel for training, defense, or offensive purposes.

    Quote from the readings: “The bases are literally bases for weapons, but
    also … cultural miscommunications, sex work, …” (places where people live,
    have recreation, where arms companies can show their wares, where people
    can venture into the neighbouring community)

    So bases have a deep social embeddedness in places.

Why do bases exist?

    Strategic

    Bureaucratic

    Imperial

    Desire for direct or indirect control

    US is securing its imperial ambitions through this network of bases

    Used to extract wealth and maintain dominance

Social life of bases

    environmental consequences - weapon testing (incl. nukes), minefields, etc.

    Korean “comfort women”, 1950

    toxins left in a particular environment can last much longer than the
    immediate violent cost of war

Aljazeera Faultlines - America’s War Workers (short film ~25 minutes)

    Contractors and subcontractors hired to manage the bases in Afghanistan

    Workers from India, 14 months away from home, had to pay $4000 to
    recruiter, now being paid $750/month

    “Tricked into working in Afghanistan, promised $1200/mo job at Dyncore,
    given $500/mo at Ecolog, paid recruiting officer $4000+interest, had to
    work for ~1yr to pay that off. This is illegal human trafficking in many
    countries, including the US”

    Man who worked for Supreme (NATO food supplier), paid $2500, but the
    contract was cancelled

    Fluor corp and Dynacore (?) contractors for food, cleaning, laundry, etc.
    on bases

    Most contractors have HQs in Dubai

    Recruiters, contractors, subcontractors are all making a profit; workers
    are a commodity that don’t profit at all

    Obama and other US lawmakers have put in place anti-trafficking laws for US
    bases, but they aren’t enforced!

    Video takeaway: Social impact of bases, even for people not living near a
    base

Blacksites - a series of secret prisons run by the CIA, outside of American
soil, usually not officially confirmed. Usually meant to imprison suspected
terrorists and other non-state actors, subversions of international and
domestic law.

Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA) - 90s

    Using new technologies for strategic warfare and intelligence-gathering
    rather than relying on a mass-deployment of troops

    “strategic and surgical strikes”

    Led to the rise of asymmetrical warfare; soldiers can be in command centres
    or control centres instead of on the front lines; firing long-range
    missiles or controlling unmanned drones

    Dangerous effect on the nature of warfare: US soldiers have no risk of
    dying, so it becomes a lot easier (physically and psychologically) to
    conduct warfare and kill people

    Makes warfare disproportionately one-sided (asymmetrical)

    Notable shift in reliance on distance targeting and unmanned weaponry

    Blowback to the RMA: suicide bombings, civilian targeting, damaging to
    conventions of war as justifiable

    Bases are no longer staging ground for mass-deployments, but rather
    technological staging grounds for “pre-emptive war” (against a perceived
    threat that hasn’t actually done anything yet)

    Shift towards creating temporary outposts for more surgical warfare

    RMA (developed through 1990s) is the context in which the war on terror,
    blacksites, and drone warfare came about (2000s, George Bush, 2001 trade
    centre attacks)

    Strong desire to shift towards a “doctrine of preemption” (The Bush
    Doctrine): The US justifies preemptive action in order to prevent “credible
    threats”

    Torture Memos, 2002 (Alberto Gonzales): makes a case as to how torture
    could be justified under US law because of the situation on the war on
    terror; “enhanced interrogation techniques” redefining pain/suffering

    “war supercedes this legal restriction on torture”

    “necessity or self-defense might justify methods that violate the law
    against torture” (violates section 2340A)

    2009: Obama prohibited torture, but not extraordinary rendition

    Past 5 years: at least 1000 drone strikes; 52 civilians killed in 2011
    alone; high-profile killings of US citizens in Yemen, other countries;
    almost all targets are preemptive killings (people who haven’t committed
    the act yet)

    2013 speech to council on foreign relations by Obama: justified drone
    strikes as keeping soldiers out of harm’s way while fighting terrorism;
    killing of US citizens justified because this is war, and US citizenship
    doesn’t protect you from being targeted as an enemy combatant

    War on terror accelerates blurring of line between civilian and soldier

    Banksy drone piece “why did you kill my family?”

    Children in Afghanistan drawing drones in their childish drawings

(take-home points)

