Lecture 3 May 19 2015

Mobility and Border Security

Airport security

    Where our mobility is slowed down in the name of security!

    Picture: Lineup at U.S. pre-clearance in Pearson Airport

        This is a fairly new system - part of "post-9/11 security measures".
        A bilateral agreement done to streamline security practices between
        Canada and U.S.

        Also "nexus" program for pre-approving passengers for customs.

        Aftermath of Sept 11 2001 - U.S. created a "smart border security"
        system, as well as the Department of Homeland Defense.

        Canada also created the Canada Border Services Agency and CATSA.

        On the one hand, border systems had to create barriers to try and stop
        threats. On the other, they had to maintain permeability of the border
        and uphold international travel and relations.

        Moves to create enhanced border security were actually in progress
        before 9/11, so we can't simply say that these initiatives were in
        direct response to the 9/11 attacks. The ball was already rolling.

        Although these changes look like they are increasing security and
        efficiency at the border, certain historical contexts can lead to
        criticisms.

Cold War 1947-1991

    Picture: Map of the world, 1989

    Soviet Union covered much of Europe and Asia.

    Both sides had security concerns related to nuclear weapons and the
    risk of Mutually Assured Destruction (MAD)

    Satirical cartoon: Calvin and Hobbes shooting each other with darts
    and simultaneously "killing" each other.

    The U.S. had no qualms about supporting the middle east, Angola, and
    dictators in latin america. These regimes were supported by the U.S.
    as part of a security strategy while fighting communism.

    The Vietnam War was a "proxy war" for the cold war.

    Efforts were focused on securing against communist influence, or
    "containment" of the "spread" of communism.

    There was also motivation to maintain supply lines, etc.
    The cold war was really a series of hot wars, or violent conflicts,
    outside of the superpower nations.

    Resentment against the superpowers fuels a lot of contemporary
    conflict.

        e.g. The current situation in the middle east can be tied back
        to resentment created during the cold war.

    Movement looked a lot different during the cold war. The so-called
    "Iron Curtain" between eastern and western europe made it very
    difficult to cross between the two regions.

    After 1949 revolution in China, movement to/from that region was
    also limited.

    The soviet "sphere of influence" cut off access from american
    trade.

    Much conflict during that time was, therefore, a matter of
    maintaining economic influence.

    End of cold war - fall of the Berlin wall, reunification of Germany.

    By 1991, the soviet union was ended, Russia was created, as well as
    other post-soviet countries.

    For these countries, they had no choice but to participate in the
    global economy. Borders were opened between countries in ways that
    they haven't been in over 50 years. People were able to move to
    escape oppression, poverty, etc.

    There was a sense of hope in the 1990s. Some speculated that the
    last great conflict was over, and we had reached the "end of
    history" and the world would unite under democracy and the free
    market.

    However, it didn't turn out like that. None of the resentment and
    fallout created by the previous 50 years could be undone, and it
    couldn't be contained by the promise of capitalism - we couldn't
    all be happy and free.

    There was a shift in tone between positive jubilation after the cold
    war to a more ominous atmosphere as we realized that conflicts still
    exist and may even be worse. We now have to defend against small
    groups or even individuals.

    Risk management - quote from Donald Rumsfeld:

        There are things we know, things we don't know, and lots of
        things we don't know we don't know.

    As the global economy expanded, we also had more and more threats
    and risks to manage. This created a paradox for border security.

Contradictory borders

        Picture: Protestor sign

    Shangan agreement - freedom of movement between everyone in the
    european union. This increased the strength of the EU and led to
    increased integration of internal borders and increased focus on
    a singular external border around the entire EU.

    Frontex system developed - an integrated border security for the
    entire EU. FRONTEX is a pre-clearance system; people with nexus
    cards can be fast-tracked through border security (no questions
    asked regarding travel intent, etc. but baggage is still screened).

    Border security at the U.S./Mexico border also increased
    significantly, and had a very large budget. We'll discuss this more
    in another lecture.

    Intelligent borders

        Picture: Biometric passports
        Picture: FRONTEX clearance gates in Europe

        Advanced collection and categorization of data to assess each
        passengers' "risk level".

    The idea of externalizing risks - risk management happening outside
    of the U.S. borders. Questions asked of you to assess your risk
    level, while also placing that risk outside of American soil.

        e.g. American pre-clearance authorities placed within, say,
        Canadian borders.

    This imperative keeps risk outside of the physical U.S.

    Airports themselves now act like borders in many ways. All of the
    trappings of a border - customs, security, and pre-clearance - are
    all contained in an airport, and you essentially enter a new country
    without changing your geographical location.

    Increasing use of biometric data - a relatively new practice.
    Embedding of fingerprints and other physical attributes/measurements
    in our identification system. This has emerged in partnership with
    private companies - private airlines, analytics firms, security
    firms - required to make risk management happen smoothly.

    A lot of data is required to make the determinations regarding
    someone's mobility (or lack therof).

    This raises concerns for accountability.

        e.g. Carrier liability

            Someone being denied entry means the airline is responsible
            for returning the passenger.

            Putting immigration enforcement duties in the hands of
            private companies or militaries is problematic because
            these organizations have their own agendas.

    How are governments held accountable for data collection done by
    private companies?

Racial Profiling

    Who pays the costs of all this securitization?

    In a sense, we all pay the cost by sacrificing privacy and
    convenience.

    However, racial profiling, criminalization, and stereotyping
    has a much more drastic impact.

    The acceleration of the criminalization of these groups has
    become more and more problematic post-2001.

    The prominence and justification of racial profiling is largely
    a result to the reaction to 9/11. The stereotype of the "Islamic
    terrorist" became very common, and many people were detained or
    scrutinized solely based on demographics.

    No fly lists were created, Canada created the National Security
    Certificate system in 2002 (later removed) for watching certain
    individuals.

        Picture: Maher Arar, Canadian citizen extradited to torture
        in Syria in 2002

    Pictures: Eyal checkpoint, Qalqilia, West Bank 

        Checkpoint between Israel and the West Bank
        Used to control movement of workers from the West Bank to Israel
        522 different checkpoints and roadblocks exist between Israel
        and the West Bank.
        Some argue that these limitations placed on workers from
        Palestine are too great.
        A quarter of all Palestinians live in poverty.
        All workers passing over the border have to pass through a
        complex system of borders - at Eyal, just one gate - before
        getting to work, and there is no guaruntee that they will even
        get to work on time.
        This process is reversed coming home, essentially turning each
        work day into a 14 hour day.
        48000 permanent work permits given to Palestinians, of which
        there are over 100000.
        Israel West Bank wall constructed to further decrease movement,
        and even cuts off one town from its surrounding neighbourhood in
        one place. Once completed, it will be over 700km long.
        Since 2006, in response to attacks on Israel by Gaza, the
        Israeli government issued a blockade on trade from Gaza.
        
        Reason for all of this information: The way movement is impacted
        by border security actually has a large impact on inequality.

        U.S. security leads to racial profiling.

        Palestinian border security leads to economic inequality.

        The use of the wall and checkpoints actually has a great deal of
        impact on the economic fortunes on different groups.

        Checkpoints further stigmatize Palestinian workers as a group
        to be feared, which in turn justifies enhanced security
        measures.

        So whose security is actually being maintained here? How do we
        even define security?

            The ability to work.
            The freedom to move unrestricted.
            The ability to not be scrutinized against.
            The ability to remain safe.

        Some of these debates surrounding security practices might make
        a great topic for your research paper!

    Picture: Lineup in Israel - people waiting in a fenced compund to get to
    work.

    Picture: Cornwall, Ontario, protest on reserve against mandatory gun
    possession for border agents.

Akwesasne

    Conflicts between members of the community being forced to deal with border
    crossings within their own reserve.

    Picture: Idle No More Protest, Akwesasne, 2013

        Demanding sovereignty

    After the development of the nation-states and settler nations (like Canada)
    these borders came to overwrite the existing nations' borders.

    The Akwesasne reserve's borders were created pre-colonization. The imposed
    border was agreed upon by the U.S. and Canada, but not by the reserve.

    These nations are still here, though.

    What legitimacy do nation-state borders have if they were founded on the
    destruction of indigenous nations, and many first nations don't even
    claim citizenship in the new nation?

    The first nations are not being allowed the same control as that of the
    Canadian government.

Key themes:

    Sovereignty is not a stable or fixed thing.
        However, sovereignty is also about history, and is about acts of
        sovereignty. When the Canadian state arms border guards, that is an act
        of sovereignty. When that is protested, that is another act of
        sovereignty.

        When passports are issued by our government, that is an act of
        sovereignty. Nations choosing to ignore passports or to not accept them
        is another act of sovereignty.

        Difficult question: Are first nations who reject passports/citizenship
        still considered Canadian citizens?
        
        Not all sovereignties are recognized equally, but all can be claimed
        and/or asserted.

        Argument: All of North America is actually international, as it
        encompasses many different supposedly sovereign nations.

    Borders and checkpoints are places where power is exerted.

        The power to determine who is risky or who isn't, or to arm guards, or
        to determine how many gates must be crossed through to get to work,
        or to determine which side of the border a new wall is built on.

Take home points will be posted on LEARN.

