1a Introduction to Psychology

    Psychology has a great breadth

    Psychology isn't merely common sense, but often we thought the opposite of
    what is true.

        e.g. Opposites don't attract.

    Psychology isn't about unethical studies, animal torture, etc.

        Since the late 1960s much care is taken to remain ethical.

    Animal sacrifice can still be done, but it is rarer nowadays.

    Now, much research on the brain is done on humans, with machines that can
    take pictures.

    A way to think about psychology:

        It has to do with what people think; it's about the thoughts that are
        in our heads.

        Historically, some thought that 'thoughts' should not be part of
        psychology.

        It also has to do with how we feel about things, our emotions, and
        motivations.

        Reactions, emotions, thoughts, and such are often not aligned.

            e.g. Getting too nervous to ask someone out.

        Psychology is also about how you act.

        So, three main areas: thoughts, feelings, and actions.

History of Psychology

    1b1 The Three Beginnings of Psychology

        Who do we think is the first psychologist?
            1. Freud
                The psychiatric tradition
                Contributed important contribution to the beginnings of
                psychology
                Started psychoanalysis
                Tradition more represented in medicine nowadays
            2. Testing tradition
                Seen most heavily in intelligence testing
                Developed in England
                Sir Francis Galton, a first cousing of Charles Darwin
            3. Academic approach (laboratory psychology)
                Wilhelm Wundt
                    Set up the first psychology laboratory
                    Wundt is interesting for his failure
                    Scientific approach
                    Chemical - 'mental atoms' of thoughts
                William James
                    A student of Wundt's and a contemporary of Freud's
                    Made much ley progress
                    Brought psychology to North America
                John B Watson
                    Early proponents of behaviourism
                Gestalt pschologists in Europe

    1b2 The Psychiatric Tradition

        Dominated by Freud

            Had a very complex theory about the way the psyche worked
            Two primary motives driving people - sex and aggression
            Much of what drives our behaviour is unconscious
            Huge inner mental life that we are unaware of which is very complex
            and very devious

            One of his most famous, whacky ideas - Oedipus complex.

                Influenced much of adult development.
                Was the central problem to human psyche.
                "As children boys want to have sex with their mother, and in
                realizing that this is not possible, vicariously live this
                through his father's sex life with the mother."
                Didn't explain how women developed at all.

        Carl Jung

            Incredibly brilliant
            More important for his literature
            His psych theories not taken very seriously

        Carl Adler

            Had different ideas from Freud
            Adler believed that people wanted to be powerful and in control
            Echoed in modern psych via self esteem

        Ego Psychologists

            Followed in the Freudian tradition and have made an important impact
            on modern psychology.

            Erik Erickson - model of social development
            Karen Horney and Henry Stack Sullivan - focused on the importance of
            relationships in developing the self-concept.
            (Social psych, social psych of relationships very contemporary.)

        Major assumptions of the psychiatric tradition

            Cannot rely on what people say or do to indicate anything, because
            most mental life is unconscious.

                Less emphasis on what people tell you, but on the interpretation
                of what is said.

            Emphasis on understanding each individual person comprehensively.

                Studying one person at a time and knowing all details.

                Most research done in the psychiatric tradition has been through
                therapy over a number of years

                Understanding the individual comprehensively as a whole

            The best approach is a clinical approach

                More is learned by people who are sick than those who are
                healthy, and by doing therapy. That tells you more about what
                is hidden beneath the psyche, what is really going on.

    1b3 the Testing Tradition

        Charles Darwin

        Sir Francis Galton - Darwin's cousin

            Naive idea of how to study what makes people "fit".
            What makes people geniuses?
            Underlying elitism/aristocracy - some people were better than
            others.

            Conencted his ideas to Darwin's theory of evolution.

            Assumed smartest people were those who were the most fit.

            Believed the first measure of intelligence was physical tests.
            (Following a spinning disk, riding a bike fast.)

            "A miserable failure. But a brilliant Mathematician!"

        Spearman

            Student of Galton, developed many new important statistical
            techniques.

            Factor analysis - way of figuring out what goes together.

        Cattel & Eysenek

            Students of Spearman
            Famous in the trait tradition
            Two different views ended up creating similar model
            Two major components to personality:
                1. Introversion vs Extroversion
                2. Neuroticism vs Mellow

        Binet

            First to figure out how to actually perform an intelligence test.

            Covered topics one would learn at school.

            Trying to figure out age/grade level.

            Very similar to what we now think of as school testing.

        Major assumptions of the testing tradition

            1. Psychology is primarily a product of biology

                 Emphasis on nature over nurture

                 If you want to know what people are about, study the
                 evolutionary basis of behaviour.

            2. There are only a few ways in which people differ

                There are only a small number of traits which can explain how
                people differ

            3. People's traits can be understood through simple tests.

                Questionnaires and paper and pencil tests make up almost all of
                the research in this tradition

    1b4 The Academic Tradition

        Wilhelm Wundt

            Psychological atomism

            Would have people come in and tell him about a thought that they
            had had; introspect

            Thought he would get a nice periodic table of "psychological atoms",
            but it made no sense

        William James

            Pragmatism

            Believed Wundt was wrong for not studying what people really cared
            about

            Pragmatic approach - study things that are meaningful to people

            Still important in North American psychology

            "What does this matter?" is an important question.

        Watson & Skinner

            Took the approach of behaviourism, which dominated NA psych for
            about 40 years

            Believed that Wundt was not scientific enough, studying thoughts
            which cannot be observed

            If we need to be scientific, we need to study something observable,
            like behaviour.

            Defined psychology as the scientific study of behaviour.

            Made progress in a number of different domains

        Kurt Lewin

            European

            Gestalt psychology

            Argued that Wundt made a wrong assumption, that the whole does not
            equal the sum of its parts.

            This was a powerful perspective.

            Many times the parts don't add up to the wholes that we see and come
            to know and understand.

        Major assumptions

            Psychology is best understood when the causes are understood
                
                We need to understand what causes a behaviour

                The why is more important than the how or the when

            People's thoughts and actions can be understood.

                Thoughts and actions are not outside of the individual, are not
                irrelevant.

                By observing people, we can understand them

            Systematic study produces the fullest understanding

                Labs were set up

                Wundt's lab - how long does it take to press a button?

                    Reaction time

    1b5 Three New Beginnings in Psychology

        In the 1960s and 70s, these traditions each had a rebirth

        The Psychiatric Tradition

            Humanistic Approach "Third Wave"
            
                First was psychiatric
                Second was behaviours

            Carl Rogers

                What Rogers tried to do in his therapy was very different from
                the pschoanalytic tradition

                He reflected back to the individual what they were feeling

                Belief that people are basically good, and if you let them get
                in touch with themselves and understand themselves they will get
                better

                They need to get in touch with this good inner part of who they
                are
            
        The Trait Tradition

            Expanded to 5 from 2 traits - OCEAN

                Openness = intelligence
                    
                    Open to new experiences -> more education, more flexible
                    thinking

                Conscientiousness
                
                    people who stick to their goals and work to get things done

                Extroversion

                    (Above)

                Agreeableness

                    How positive or negative of a person are you

                Neuroticism

                    (Above)

        The Academic Tradition

            The cognitive revolution

                In the 60s and 70s there was growth and changes from
                behaviourism to cognitive psychology

                Study of thought is one of the primary and important things
                about people

                Albert Bandura - observational learning

                It became clear that with behaviourism, there was much that
                could not be explained

                We can learn by observing people rather than just being
                reinforced ourselves

                Changed the face of psychology

    1c1 Basic Philosophy of Science

        (Behind research methodologies of psychology.)

        Big questions behind research methodology

        Focus on academic tradition

        Other traditions do not necessarily feel the same way

        Our ideas can be wrong

            "Healthy skepticism"

            "I know my idea can be wrong"

            We set out to demonstrate that our ideas are wrong

                Only draw firm conclusions when we have shown that the idea is
                wrong

            We accept an idea when we can't prove that it is wrong

                "The textbook should not be read as fact, but as a bunch of
                ideas we haven't disproved yet."

                This doesn't protect the idea from being disproved in the future

                Good to have healthy skepticism when reading the text

            We might prove everything wrong later!

                True in all branches of science, including physics.

        A number of things influence these ideas.

            What is accepted is often what is popular rather than the data.

            Also shaped by political forces and social influences.

    1c2 Ways of Doing Research

        Tension between discovery and explanation

            When something is discovered and is brand new, does it mean
            anything?

            Some sciences are mostly about explanation; how things work, how
            things unfold (like chemistry).

                Astronomy is more abour discovery.

            Psychology is in the middle - new discoveries, but explanation is
            important

            Different traditions have different emphasis on discovery and
            explanation

            Psychiatric tradition uses mostly case studies in its research.

        Freud's famous case study - Anna O

            Freud was Anna's therapist for many years
            Developed an unusual sickness after a couple of years of caring for
            her sick father
            Was blind even though nothing was physically wrong with her
            Also had glove paralysis - paralysis of her left hand.

                Strange - it should be numb all the way up her arm!

            Freud believed that Anna was having fantasies about sex with her
            father, and that was the cause of her problems.

            Many modern psychologists feel that Anna was being sexually abused
            by her father

            Freud thought her tales of abuse were part of her fantasy

        Naturalistic observation

            Similar to case study but usually broader

            Observe, watch, and see what happens

            Jane Goodall's research with chimps

            Not very often done with people

        Survey research

            Question a sample of the population

            Goal is to find out what the whole population is like

            Want to represent the whole population from just a sample of people

            Establishes generality

            Sets up correlations between variables

                When one thing happens, another thing tends to happen

            Correlation between children watching violent tv and being violent

            Can randomly sample children throughout all of Canada to find out
            how much ciolent tv they wathc

            Then, find out how often they use violent behaviour

            What you find is a nice, reliable correlation between the two

        Correlation doesn't mean causation

            Just because kids who watch violent tv tend to be violent doesn't
            necessarily mean that the tv caused the kids to be violent

        Experiments

            Usually about establishing causation

        Example of correlation established by survey research

            One possibility is that the violent television causes the violent
            behaviour, but what is really going on?

            Maybe its that violent kids like to watch violent tv

            Whenever you have a correlation, you have to think about which
            direction it goes in. Does A cause B or does B cause A?

            Or maybe a third thing causes both behaviours - abuse?
            Hyperactivity?

            Maybe it's education? Parent's background?

            There is always the possibility of having many variables when you
            have a correlation

            Causation establishes which one it is, which pattern is right

    1c3 Research Methods - Surveys & Establishing Representativeness

        Representative group of people

        You want the people filling out the survey to correspond to the larger
        group that you want to generalize and represent

        Random sampling

            On surveys

            Survey a subset of a large group of people

        Random assignment

        Surveys must also be unbiased

            Anchoring effects

                Give people something that you know is wrong but influences the
                way they interpret the question

                Is the Mississippi river longer or shorter than 500 miles? How
                long is it?

                Will actually give a short estimate because they are still
                influenced by the 500, even though that info is wrong.

                People given that question gave answers ~2000 shorter.

                Given X terrible incident, is capital punishment justified?
                Given the legislative slowness behind capital punishment, is it
                justified?

            Framing effects

            Surveys do a good job of establishing correlation between variables

    1c4 Correlation is not Causation: How do you establish causation?

        Correlation
            
            When one variable changes, the other variable changes as well

        Time order

            Know which "cause" comes first

            Longitudinal research - over time.

                e.g. Asking about tv usage/violence now then 3 years later

        Elimination of all other possible causes

            Were their parents more aggressive?
            Did they come from poor families?
            Were the children who were more aggressive likely to be hyperactive?

            Experiments do this by random assignment

                Randomly assign people to various conditions

                Take a small group in an experiement, and randomly have one half
                do one thing and the other half do another.

            Independant variable

                What we think is going to be the cause
                Experimental group - watches television
                Control group - doesn't watch television

            Dependent variable

                Behaviour that you are concerned with in the end; the effect
                Have children play together to see if they will fight

                We want the dependent variable to be:

                    Valid - measures what it is supposed to measure

                    Reliable - get the same outcome every time

                e.g. Violent tv variable needs to measure violence, like
                fighting. This is valid, but not reliable - kids don't always
                fight the same amount.

                Reliable = highly clustered data in the same place of a target
                Valid = hitting the bullseye

                Time order is built in

                    Independent variable leads to the dependent variable

            Random assignment eliminates other causes via probability theory.

Lecture 02: Behavioural Neuroscience I

2a The Nervous System and the Brain

    Neuron

        Basic cells making up the nervous system

    Peripheral nervous system

        All the other nerves that run through the body which are not the brain
        or the spinal cord

    The central nervous system and the brain

        Is probably one of the frontiers we understand the least in psychology

    The endocrine system

        Hormones

        The different chemicals that float through the blood and also influence
        us

    Putting it all together - hunger example

        Not separate systems, they all work together (e.g. with hunger).


2b1 The Neuron

    Picture - neuron

        Myelin sheath

            Little globule things - not present on neurons iside the brain

            Lets the electric current bounce from node to node so the impulse
            can travel quickly - impulses/reflexes faster than our brain

            Neurons part of the peripheral system and spinal cord actually work
            faster than in the brain

        Dendrites

            Branchy things found at the "back end" of the neuron

        Axon

            Branchy terminal things

        Action potential
        
            Neural impulse moves from back dendrites to the front axons

        Cell body

            Surrounded by the dendrites

            The cell's life support centre

    How do you take a piece of tissue, like a cell or neuron, and have it
    conduct electricity

        Studying sea slugs - they have large neurons

    Inside the neuron is chemical ions of one charge flowing in and out of the
    cell membrane is what creates electricity and causes it to flow down the
    neuron.

    Where two neurons come together - Axon bumping into cell body/dendrites of
    another cell - is a synapse.

        There is a synaptic gap between the sending neuron's axon terminal and
        the receiving neuron's body/dendrite.

        A litle chemical flows between the two - neurotransmitters.

        There are lots of potential connections - a whole bunch of synapses
        "vote" towards firing the signal.

        Some of those neurotransmitters make it a lot more likely for an impulse
        to start, and some make it less likely. Add them all together to decide.

        After the neurons dump their neurotransmitter, how do they get used
        again?

            They transfer back after a short while - reuptake.

    There are lots of different types of neurotransmitters.

        Dopamine
            
            Very common, especially in the brain

            Important in two remarkably different disorders:

                Parkinson's disease

                    Partially caused by deficiency of dopamine

                    Marked by tremors

                    Important in the coordination of movement

                Also important in attention and emotion

                Schizophrenia

                    Marked by an excess of dopamine in various parts of the
                    brain.
        Seratonin

            Involved in mood, hunger, sleep, and arousal

            It affects things widely in the brain

            A deficiency of seratonin is a cause for insomnia

            Deficiencies are also associated with depression

            Prozac, Zoloft - eases to depression

        Norepinephrine

            More related to alertness and arousal

            Also associated with depression

            Older depression drugs used this

        Acetylcholine

            The most common neurotransmitters

            Involved in muscle movement

            Alzheimer's Disease:

                The nerurons that work through acetylcholine get ruined with
                Alzheimer's.

            Also involved in learning and memory

        Endorphines (a whole class of neurotransmitters)

            Involved in pain regulation

                When injured, the body releases these to handle more pain

            Heroine and morphine mimic this neurotransmitter.

2b3 How Drugs Affect Neurotransmitters

    Drugs mimic the shape of a neurotransmitter

    The real transmitter fits really well

    Agonist mimic the neurotransmitter with "2/3 shapes"

    Antagonist block neurotransmitter - it gets in the way.

    So, some drugs work like the neurotransmitter (for deficiencies), while
    others block to reduce an excessive amount.

2c Divisions of the Nervous System

    Nervous system - all the neurons in the body

        Central - brain and spinal cord

        Peripheral

            Somatic - controls voluntary movements of skeletal muscles

            Autonomic - controls self-regulated action of internal organs and
            glands, like pupil dilation

                Sympathetic - arousing - "gets you ready for fight or flight"

                Parasympathetic - calming - "lets you build up all your energy"

2c1 The Peripheral Nervous System

    Autonomic nervous system

        Controls the glands

        Controls the muscles related to our organs

        Possible to regulate with conscious thought, but often spontaneous

            e.g. hiccups

        Sympathetic nervous system - arousal - often stress

            Pupils dilate - see more
            Heartbeat accelerates
            Stomach - digestion is inhibited
            Stimulates glucose release by liver
            Adrenal gland - burst of adrenaline
            Kidney - stimulates secretion of epinephrine, norepinephrine
            Bladder relaxes
            Stimulates ejaculation in male

        Parasympathetic - calming - eating and sleeping
        
            "classic thanksgiving afternoon"

            Pupils contract
            Heartbeat slows
            Stimulates digestion
            Stimulates gallbladder
            Contracts bladder (gets bigger)
            Stimulates erection of sex organs (part of sleep cycle)

2c2 The Central Nervous System

    The spinal cord

        Carries information from the peripheral nervous system up to the brain

        Does some "thinking" in controlling some responses

            Typically refered to as reflexes

            Contains some neurons that cannot only transmit things, but can
            route things different ways, almost making some primitive decisions.

    The Spinal Cord - a simple reflex

        What happens if you put your finger in a flame?

        People usually pull their finger out immediately.

        The decision is made within the spinal cord. It has things called
        interneurons that can "flip a switch" to contract motor neurons directly

        You can override these things with your brain

    The Brain

        Does almost all "processing"

        Three areas of the brain we need to know about

            Brainstem

                Controls all vital functions

                Injury often leads to death

                Very crucial

            The lymbic system

                Controls motivation and emotion

                Very important for memory

            Cerebral cortex

                The bulk of our brain

                Much larger than in animals

                Separates us from animals

        The Four Parts of the Brain Stem

            Medulla

                Absolutely critical in keeping us alive

                Controls the heartbeat and breathing

                On top of the spinal cord - common reason for death by broken
                neck.

                Damage = fatality!

            Reticular formation

                Controls attention, alertness, reactivity

                Can be thought of the accelerator of the brain

                Basic function that regulates the overall amount of brain
                activity

            Thalamus

                Sensory switching point

                Crucial for vision and other senses

                Beginning processes of our senses come about here

            The Cerebellum - cannopy-looking thing under the brain

                Crucial for movement and coordination of movement

                Crucial for balance

                Big in birds

            The Lymbic System - odd shaped grouping of things around brain stem

                Hypothalmus
                
                    Crucial for hunger

                    Controls the hormones of the Pituitary gland

                    Some influence on other emotions as well, particularly
                    pleasure

                Amygdala

                    Important for a number of things, including anger

                Hippocampus

                    Crucial for memory and for laying down the functions of
                    memory

                    Damage can cause severe types of memory loss

            The Cerebral Cortex - basic divisions

                Back part: Occipital lobe

                    Heavily involved in vision

                    Damage can blind - even with working eyes

                Top-back: Parietal lobe

                    Language and facial recognition

                    Lots of things

                Lower around the ear: Temporal lobe

                    Involved in hearing, memory, and mood

                Front: Frontal lobe

                    Important in reasoning and thinking

                    Close to half of the cortex

                    Complex processing of information

            The Cerebral Cortex Functional Divisions - Movement and Sense of
            Touch

                Motor Cortex

                    laid out like a body - toes to trunk to fingers to neck
                
                    left hemisphere section controls the body's right side

                Input: Sensory Cortex

                    left hemisphere section receives from the body's right side

                Motor and sensory are separated by a big groove

                If there is a seizure - too much electrical activity in the
                brain - they convulse if it goes through the motor cortex.

                Epillepsy can happen that misses this - seizures without
                convulsing.

                Stroke can also paralyze here.

                Often movement and touch are both lost, since they are so close.

            Hearing and vision

                Visual cortex - very back of brain

                Auditory cortex - processed right next to ear

                    Damage here can cause deafness with no possibility of
                    correction.

            Left and Right side of the brain

                Left side controls right side of body and vice-versa

                Corpus Callosum - big thick area connecting both sides, for
                exchanging information

                Epileptic study in the 1950s - lots of seizures is very bad, so
                they went in and cut the corpus collosum - cutting the two sides
                of the brain apart.

                This helps to reduce the number of seizures dramaically because
                the electrical impulses do not spread to the other side.

                Odd behaviour was then discovered - the two sides of the brain
                actually perform different functions.

                Left side is more verbal and able to process language

                Right side is better at visual processing and coordinating, and
                can only understand simple language

                Caveat: Left-handers have a brain structured like this, but some
                are reversed.

            Mike Gazanaga Study - helps explain "executive" function of the
            left brain, the ability to explain and interpret what is going
            on.

                Brain is able to do this even when it is wrong

                Right brain can process visual stimuli, and process commands

                When he would flash "get up" to the right side, a number of
                people would get up, and could instantaneously rationalize
                their behaviour.

                Left side is good at rationalizing.

                Would the right side of the brain be better at picking up what
                emotion is being shown on a face?

2d The Endocrine System

    Hypothalmus - brain region controlling Pituitary gland

    Pituitary gland - secretes many different hormones, some of which affect
    other glands

    Testes/Ovaries - secrete male/female sex hormones

    Affects Adrenal glands - inner part, the medulla, helps trigger the fight or
    flight response

    Pancreas - regulates insulin, blood sugar

    Parathyroids - help regulate the level of calcium in the blood

    Thyroid gland - affects metabolism, energy level, weight gain

    Is usually longer term - hormones stick around in the blood stream and keep
    going and going. Short term stuff is usually from the nervous system.

2e Putting it All Together - The Case of Hunger

    When we don't eat for a while, what makes us feel hungry?

    Stomach contractions - carry hunger signal trhough the peripheral nervous
    system to the hypothalmus

    But if we drink lots of water to prevent these contractions, we still feel
    hungry.

    Blood sugar levels interpreted and controlled by the liver and pancreas to
    send a message to the hypothalmus

    Lateral hypothalmus is stimulated and releases the hormone orexin which
    heightens hunger

    fMRI (functional MRI) - shows lateral hypothalmus very active when hungry

    When we eat:

        Stomach expands and this message is transmitted to the hypothalmus

        Blood sugar levels as interpreted and controlled by the liver and
        pancreas send messages of higher levels to the hypothalmus

        Insulin is also released

        Ventromedial hypothalamus is stimulated and leads to the feeling of
        satiation, so we stop the eating

        (This is a simplified, strictly physiological version!)

    Damage to the hypothalamus - rats starve to death, feel lethargic/depressed.

    Damage to ventromedial - rats never stop eating and become enormous

2f Overarching principles

    Lots of specificity, or specialization of function in specific parts of the
    brain.

    However, it's not that simple.

    The whole structure of the brain work together in coordinated, overlapping,
    and redundant systems

        e.g. Anger passes through frontal lobe - we can reason about our
        reaction

    The systems act at the same time to influence hunger

    We can't say THAT part controls THAT one thing

    Despite the specificity and complexity, the brain has lots of plasticity

        If one area is damaged, other areas can take over

            e.g. Prof's daughter had hydrocefilus - bleed in the brain - and
            didn't do any lasting damage despite significant immediate damage.

3a1 Vision

    Cornea

    Pupil

    Iris

    Lens

        Inverts the image, flashes image onto retina upside down

    Fovea

        Point of central focus on retina

    Retina

        Cross-section: 3 cells thick

            Outer: ganglion cells

            Middle layer: Bipolar cell

            Back: Rods (smaller ones) and cones (bigger ones)

                Rods are responsible for black and white

                Cones are responsible for colour

                Light must go through the two cell layers above before getting
                to the rods and cones, to protect them.

                The rods and cones fire to give visual signals (neural impulses)
                to the brain.

    Optic nerve to brain's visual cortex

        Takes signals from retina and transmits them back to the brain

    From eye to the cortex (visual cortex at the back of the brain)

        Nerves cross left-right, pass through visual area of the thalmus, and
        go to the visual cortex at the back. They cross over at the "optic
        chiasm".

        The process of turning light into shapes is "feature detection".

        In the cortex, there are individual cells that respond to lines at
        various angles.

        The brain then takes the symbols of lines to create a pattern.

        Cells converge to create our perception of what we see

        Higher level cells provide even more perception

        All of this happens virtually instantaneously

        This is all done with a massive parallel processing of information,
        currently unmatched by modern computers and arteficial intelligence

        It is still not completely understood as to how the visual cortex
        organizes all this information

    Colour vision

        How do we see all of these different colours and know what they look
        like?

        Two main theories:

            Young-Helmholtz Trichromatic Theory

                Comes from primarily studying the retina

                Three types of cones in the retina, which respond to three
                types of light; primary colours red, green, and blue
                (like a colour printer ink cartridge).

                All other colours can be made from these three

                Could just the specificity of the cones produce these different
                colours?

                Consistent with this theory are colourblind individuals

                    Red and green - problem with either green or red cones

                    Blue and green - no distinction between blue and green cones

                Theory works well until we alk about the colour yellow, which is
                only really explained as another primary colour on its own.

            The Opponent-Process Theory of Colour Vision

                There are actually three sets of opposing pairs of colours

                    Black and white (rods and cones)

                    Red and green

                    Blue and yellow

                "Things that respond to yellow don't respond to blue, etc."

                Afterimage effect

                    Opposing colours are left behind

                    Fired neurons get "worn out", so when we look at a sheet of
                    paper after staring at something, the reverse neurons fire
                    as if we are seeing the opposing colours.

                    Like a teeter-totter

            Both of these theories are probably true, but in different areas of
            the brain. At the retinal level, you have the three types of cones
            which work together to produce all the different colours.

            Opponent-process is probably true in the thalmus, higher up in the
            brain as it is processing things.

3a2 Hearing

    Outer Ear

        Pinna (outermost fleshy disk)

        Auditory canal (hole in the middle of the pinna)

        Eardrum (back of auditory canal)

            Vibrates like the top of a drum

    Middle ear

        Three bones transmit the eardrum vibrations mechanically

        Vestibular sacs for balance

    Inner ear

        Stirrup attaches here and vibrates the cochlea

        Cochlea turns physical stimulus into neural impulses
            
            Like the retina of the ear

        Auditory nerve (coming out of the cochlea)

    Closer look at the cochlea

        Fluid "sloshes" through basilar or cochlear membrans protruding hair
        cells - nerve fibers to auditory nerve

        Sound waves -> eardrum -> hammer -> anvil -> stirrup -> oval window
        -> cochlea

        How does this fluid get turned into a neural impulse?

            Place theory

                Particular hairs determine pitch

                Big waves are going to hit back a lot further creating one pitch
                (lower sounds, because low sounds make big waves).

                Higher sounds are going to make smaller waves, which land closer
                in

                This theory can't explain the ultra-high sounds we cannot hear
            
            Frequency theory

                The speed of the waves determine the pitch

                Big waves go slower, and little waves go faster

            Both theories seem to be true

            Place theory works well for high pitch sounds, and it is the
            particular hairs that matter

            Frequency theory explains low sounds, it is the frequency of the
            waves pushing lots of hairs at once to create a richer, fuller sound

3a3 The Other Senses - Taste, Smell, Touch, Pain, and Balance

    Taste

        Four basic tastes - sweet, sour, salty, bitter

        Tongue has tastebuds that respond to these different tastes

        Taste sensations are created by chemical reactions on the taste buds,
        rather than a physical reaction as in sight and hearing

        Taste is also heavily influenced by smell

        Together they respond to much of the same stimuli 0 this is called
        sensory interaction

        Often what enhances the flavour of the food is the smell rather than
        the combination of sweet, sour, salty, bitter

    Smell

        Also a chemical sense

        Occurs due to a chemical reaction in the olfactory membrane that creates
        smell

        We still don't know exactly how olfactory membrane receptors work

        There are a tonne of different smells - way more than the 4 taste combos

        Chemical in the air gets picked up by these receptors in the olfactory
        membrane which creates a neural impulse

        Odors can powerfully evoke memories and emotions

            Why?

            Nasal passage -> receptors in olfactory membrane - situated right
            next to limbic system (hippocampus, amygdala)

    Touch

        "We know less and less as we go down this list of senses."

        Organ for touch is skin

        There are specialized nerve endings in the skin, but these don't seem
        to have a relationship with what we feel - it's not an easy mapping

        Our skin is sensitive to pressure, warmth (not hot), cold, and pain

        These four sensitivities give rise to quite varied sensations

            e.g. A tickle

                Hard to explain why ticklishness is dependent on having it done
                by someone else

        The sense of touch doesn't map onto the physical sensation nearly as
        much as some other senses

        Hot = warm + cold, an interesting physical illusion

        Wet = cold + pressure

        Itchiness = overstimulated pain receptors

    Pain

        More is known about pain, but it is increasingly difficult to understand

        No definable area of the brain that is related to pain

        Memories tend to be of the magnitude of the pain, but not the duration

        Gate control theory

            Suggests that the spinal cord has a neurological gate that either
            blocks pain signals or allows them to travel to the brain

            Distractions close the gate and make pain more manageable

            Brain is blocking out the pain response with lots of other responses

            Endorphins, which are the body's natural pain killers, may shut that
            gate right at the spinal cord so those signals can't get to the
            brain

    Balance

        AKA kinesthetic sense

        Feeling of being disoriented or fuzzy

        Seems to occur through two very different sense organs

        The joints and muscles tell us our body's position

        Also the semi-circular canals in the ears tell us the vestibular sense
        of balance and orientation, particularly for the head

            Grains of sand rolls around on hairs in the vestibular


4 Developmental Psychology

4a What is Behaviourism

    Classical conditioning

        Pavlov and his dogs

    Operant conditioning

        Skinner and his pigeons

    "Then came the fall of the house of cards - new theories found flaws in
     traditional conditioning. This is when developmental psychology began."

    Language Acquisition

        How is it that we learn to speak?

    Observational Learning

        "We learn by watching somebody else do something, AKA modelling."

4b Classical Conditioning

    Pavlov wanted to study spit. Why is it there?

        Had test tubes hooked up to the saliva glands of dogs to collect the
        spit.

        He noticed that after a few days, just walking up to the dogs to give
        them food would cause them to salivate.

        He then wondered why they were salivating before food was there.

        Unconditional stimulus (UCS) produces an unconditional response (UCR),
        i.e. food in mouth elicits salivation

        Conditioned stimulus (e.g. metronome) and eventually the neutral
        stimulus alone produces a conditioned response (CR), thus becoming a
        conditioned stimulus (CS).

        Pavlov did this with many different neutral stimuli: lights, bells, etc.

    What is learning and unlearning?

        In classical conditioning, learning is associating conditioned stimulus
        or neutral stimulus with an unconditioned stimulus to the point where
        the conditioned stimulus produces the unconditioned response.

        Pavlov didn't understand the implications of this and didn't realize how
        these results could be generalized/

    John Watson was one of the early American behaviourists.

        Didn't study thoughts, but rather what is observable.

        Used Pavlov's ideas on teaching/learning.

        Wagered that he could take twenty children and raise them to be
        anything. i.e. teaching someone to be afraid of soft and fuzzy.

        You could teach someone something that makes no sense, and they can,
        for example, learn to be afraid of something irrational.

    This is called the process of generalization

        Occurs when conditioned stimulus is changed a bit but the
        conditioned response still happens.

        Screaming and crying is the conditioned response - something that can be
        observed - rather than fear, an unobservable emotion.

    Opposite of generalization is discrimination

        Happens when conditioned stimulus is changes and the conditioned
        response doesn't happen.

        The concept of "unlearning".

        e.g. Little Albert being afraid of of rats but not bunnies because he
        can differentiate between the two.

        Can be taught by presenting the unconditioned stimulus only with the rat
        and never with the bunny.

    Extinction

        Happens when conditioned stimulus (unconditioned response) no longer
        produces the response.

        "When it no longer happens."

        Theoretically happens if unconditioned stimuli is no longer paired with
        the conditioned stimuli.

    Problems with classical conditioning

        The only behaviour being influenced is something that they would
        normally do.

        You can't get the organism to do new, unnatural behaviours (e.g. long
        division). We can't associate a behaviour or stimuli when teaching long
        division.

4c Operant Conditioning

    Allows behaviours that wouldn't naturally occur to happen.

    Skinner proposed that any behaviour engaged by anyone has been learnt
    through operant conditioning.

    How does this happen? How do we get behaviour that doesn't occur as an
    unconditional response (UCR)?

    Skinner proposed that rewarded behaviour occurs more often in the future,
    and behaviour that is not rewarded will occur less often.

    Skinner says almost all behaviour follows this.

    Note: Has nothing to do with punishment, only with rewards (or lack therof).

    By rewarding pigeons with food for doing behaviours which he wanted them to
    do, he could teach them to do miraculous things (e.g. playing Betoven on a
    tiny piano). Pigeons don't do this naturally.

    Learning is, therefore, about taking on new behaviours.

    Different types of reinforcement:

        Positive reinforcer - getting good things

            e.g. The pigeon getting food

        Negative reinforcer - removing bad things (still good)

            e.g. Taking Aspirin to get rid of a headache

        Note: negative reinforcers aren't punishments.

        Skinner said punishment isn't a way to teach - it doesn't show you what
        to do. Something bad happening doesn't teach you what to do.

            Punishment leads to inaction rather than action.

        Primary reinforcers - pleasant in their own right, like candy

        Conditioned (secondary) reinforcers - pleasant through association

            e.g. Associating money (secondary) buys pleasant (primary) things.

            Conditioned stimuli (money) gets associated with unconditioned
            stimuli (what the money buys). Notice how we snuck classical
            conditioning in to help explain operant conditioning.

    Both argue that thoughts are "epiphenomenon" - things that don't matter and
    have no influence. All you need to do is study what can be observed, and
    anything can be explained without looking at thought. This was where operant
    conditioning fell short, however.

4d Language Acquisition

    Was language learned via behaviourism?

        Skinner argued that language was learnt through enforcement.

        e.g. Children receive reinforcement (like affection) from their parents
        when they first began to speak words instead of babbling.

    Chomsky said that language learning was innate - an inborn ability to learn
    language.

    There is a critical period early on in which everyone learns language.

    Chomsky was not a psychologist, but a linguist.

    Aurgued Skinner was naive - language couldn't simply be taught by way of
    reinforcement.

    "You can teach your pigeon to play the piano, Skinner, but can you teach it
     to talk?"

    Bottom line: behaviourism is clearly wrong - children learn language very
    quickly. Babies can hear all the different ranges of sound that people make.

    After about a year, children's brains become used to the language thay they
    hear and can no longer hear certain sounds.

        e.g. Foereign language speakers have a hard time differentiating between
        certain non-native syllables.

    Children can learn thousands of words per day and pick up a foreign language
    without much effort. "Old dogs have a harder time learning new languages
    than the young pups."

    This all suggests that there is a built-in ability to learn language rather
    than learning everything by reinforcement.

4e Observational Learning

    "The final nail in the coffin of behaviourism."

    Bandura - Bobo doll study - trained as a behaviourist but criticized it,
    saying that you can learn by watching others.

    This means that thoughts intervene with one's actions.

    Bobo Doll Study

        In one condition - adults beat up the bobo doll, kick the bobo doll,
        etc. What would the children play with? Will they beat up the bobo doll?

        Those who didn't witness the beatings hit the bobo doll an average of
        two times. Those who did hit it sixty-two times.

        These kids learned how to be violent!

        Bandura argued that children learned to be violent by watching violent
        television.

        This also demonstrated that thoughts matter in learning.

4f The Big Picture: Fundamental Issues Being Addressed

    Nature vs Nurture

    Behaviourists focused most on nurture - Watson raising twenty children into
    anything, Skinner believing he could create a utopian society through
    behaviourist principles.

    Now with langauge acquisition and the inborn ability to learn language, we
    have more of a focus on nature.

    Important question: Could behaviourism explain what was really important? Is
    it applicable to everyday life? Behaviourism tripped up here by not
    explaining observational learning.
    
    Although no longer an over-arching theory, behaviourism can still be used to
    control some behaviours (e.g. in therapy).

5a Developmental Psychology II: The Big Picture

    Physical development

        We'll focus on big changes early and late
    
    Cognitive development

        Piaget's Theory
        Recent evidence extending and qualifying this theory

    Social development

        Attachment Theory - starting in childhood
        Erikson's Theory - whole lifespan
        Gender Development

5b Phsyical Development

    Physical Development in Infancy

        Many milestones, but huge variability among the first two years.

        Movement - rolling over to walking up steps.

            Sudden infant death syndrome can be prevented from rolling over and
            getting their face stuck.

        Standing alone and walking are, on average, separated by a month :3

    Physical Development in Old Age

        Declines in the senses - sharp decline from ages 70 to 90.

        Fatal car accidents most common before 25 and after 55, esp. after 70.

5c1 An Introduction to Piaget's Theory

    Early psychologist active from early 1900s to 1950s.

    Developed his theory by playing with children rather than doing experiments.

    Based on what they did, he would design theories about how they develop.

    Proposed (controversially) that there were stages of development, with
    dramatic shifts rather than continuous development.

    Schema - a way to think about the world.

        Piaget argued each stage had a different way of thinking about the
        world.

            e.g. A classroom - we're supposed to take notes, listen, etc.

    Within each schema, we have:

        Assimilation - adding information to your schema.

            e.g. Had to assimilate note-taking tools, lecturer's style, and
            class format (but we still think of it as a classroom.

        Accomodation - changing your schema based on new information.

            e.g. A play in class instead of a lecture - we would have to
            develop a new schema to accomodate for lighting, performance,
            acting, watching, etc.

5c2 Piaget's Stages of Development

    Birth to 2 years

        Sensorimotor - experiencing world through actions (not much thought).

        Object permanence - developed around 8 months. Before then, a dropped
        rattle would disappear.
        
        Stranger anxiety - fear of people the child doesn't know very well.
        The child learns the permanency of their mother and dislikes their
        absence.

    2 to 6 years

        Preoperational - representing things with words and images, but not
        logical.

            e.g. Taller glass looks like it has more water.
            e.g. Checkers spaced farther apart (even though a 5 year old can
                 count them).

        Pretend play

        Egocentrism - can't see someone else's perspective.

            e.g. Kids describing what they see while hiding their head instead
            of what the other person will see.

        Language development

    7 to 11 years

        Concrete operational - thinking logically about concrete events,
        grasping analogies, arithmetic.

        According to Piaget, they must need these objects in front of them
        though.

    12 through adulthood

        Formal operational - abstract reasoning (seems to have the least
        evidence).

        Mature moral reasoning

5c3 Extensions and Qualifications of Piaget's Theory

    Does object permanence really emerge around 8 months?

        No, it's much earlier, in a more general and gradual way.

    Focus on UWaterloo research - Infant Cognition (Dr. Andrea Aguiar).

        Research assistant, now a professor.

        90% of babies showed a response.

        At 2.5 months - simple rule: if something is behind something you won't
        see it, even if it doesn't cross a gap in the object.

        At 2.5 to 3 months, a doll moving from one side of the object to the
        other surprises the child if it doesn't show in the gap, but don't pay
        attention to height.

        From 3 to 3.5 months, objects appearing unexpectedly from behind shorter
        obstacles will surprise the child.

    Egocentrism and the Theory of Mind

        The notion that you can understand what someone else is thinking.

        Recall: Piaget said egocentrism lasted until around age 7.

        Theory of mind parallels to object permanence - gradual with age, with
        different aspects to full understanding.

        e.g. Sally puts a ball in a red cupboard, but Anne moves it to the blue
        cupboard. Kids predict Sally will open the blue cupboard, based on their
        own perspective. Rather than 7, kids can solve this puzzle around ages
        4-5.

    Development is more continuous and earlier than Piaget proposed.

        Dr. Aguiar's research showed how bits and pieces are picked up over time
        rather than with dramatic shifts.

5d Social Development
5d1 Attachment Theory

    Harlow's monkey studies

        Baby monkeys raised with wire monkey with food, but they prefer soft
        terry-cloth mother without food.

        Harlow believed that affection and touch is very important.

    Theory behind attachment theory

        Inborn need to bond with our caregiver

        This relationship will be the basis for all other relationships that
        individual will have.

    The strange situation - Mary Ainsworth

        Mothers come into the experiment with 13-16 month old, leave child in a
        toy room. How do the children respond to the mother leaving?

        How did the child respond to the mother coming back?

        Secure attachment pattern - child is somewhat upset to see the mother
        leave, but very happy when the mother returns.

        Anxious attachment pattern - child would be very upset when mother
        leaves, but very happy and clingy when they return.

        Avoidance attachment pattern - child is either upset or not when the
        child leaves, but wants nothing to do with her when she comes back.

        These patterns can be divided into secure and insecure attachment.

            Secure - misses the mother, seeks reunion, but is able to deal with
            time on their own.

            Insecure - either doesn't miss theor mother or isn't able to deal
            with being on their own.

        This can predict the number of friends children will make when going to
        school - securely attached infants between 1 and 1.5 are better at
        making friends and have a sense of social competence.

        There is also evidence that people that have secure relationships are
        also the ones who develop good adult relationships.

        This would suggest that trust can be taught through a stable, loving
        relationship with the primary caregiver.

5d2 Erikson's Theory

    Theory goes from infancy to old age.

    Ideas have Freudian roots to them; Erikson was actually Freud's cheufer.

    Believed that there were certain challenges that needed to be dealt with at
    certain points in one's life. Accomplishing those challenges is the primary
    social issue during each stage of life.

    Infancy (<1) - basic issue is trust vs. mistrust.

    Toddlerhood (1-2) - basic issue is autonomy vs. shame and doubt "I can do it
    myself".

    Preschooler (3-5) - Initiative vs. guilt

    Elementary school (6-puberty) - Competence vs. inferiority "doing things
    well"

    Adolescence (teen-early 20s) - Identity vs. role confusion

    Young adulthood - Intimacy vs. isolation

    Middle adulthood - Generativity vs. stagnation "mid-life crisis", "feeling
    like you've contributed to the world", "re-emergence of intimacy and
    identity issues"

    Late adulthood - Integrity vs. despair "I've lived a good life"

    Criticisms:
    
        Culture bound (very western). Intimacy and identity in the early
        1900s have been pushed much later. Autonomy is a very western idea.

        Theory doesn't explain who will have trouble or not.

        Why would Bill Clinton have a mid-life crisis?

        Premature babies - sense of bonding in an incubator is encouraged;
        holding and cuddling with babies, even in the respirator, gives a
        better chance.

        Theory is more of a framework that a serious model; order may not be
        entirely right; some things might be missing.

5c3 Gender Development

    A common observation: children's behaviour, particularly play, is gender
    stereotyped.

    Why does this behaviour come out?

        Is it how parents treat them? Erikson's attachment theory says parents
        shape their children.

        A number of studies showed that parents don't have that much influence
        over children, especially in gener stereotyped behaviour.

        No relationship between the way in which parents treat their children,
        what values the parents have, and how children turn out.

        Gender stereotypes are kinda like learning an accent.

        We pick it up from the society at large.

    Social Learning Theory
        
        The bobo doll version of gender development

        Watch others to see what gets rewarded and what gets punished

        By the way girls and boys are punished/rewareded, children can
        develope gender type behaviour.

    Gender Schema Theory

        Argues that gender is learned from your culture, which gives you a
        gender schema; a gender lens.

        Gender-organized thinking, gender-typed behaviour.

        This model explains why boys and girls tend to have same-sex friends.

    Social learning theory and gender schema theory probably both occure and
    work together to produce gender behaviour.
6a Cognitive Psychology I - Memory: The Big Picture

    Memory as information processing

        Stages and events of memory

    Effortful memory

        When we are trying to learn and remember

    Memory without awareness (and without effort)

        When we remember things we do not realize we remember

    The fragility of memory

        Our memories are often a distorted view of reality
        Memory isn't a "steel trap" where events are captured and remain
        perfectly, e.g. when you get in a fight with someone and you both recall
        events differently.

6b Stages of Memory

    External events -> sensory input -> sensory memory -> attention to important
    or novel information (encoding) -> short-term memory -> encoding -> 
    long-term memory

    Short-term memory: Activated memory that holds a few items briefly

    Long-term memory: The relatively permanent and limitless storehouse in
    memory

    Process of encoding, storage, and retrieval

    We can have problems when we don't remember things

    The information may not have been encoded properly

    We could have trouble remembering information if it got lost in storage

    Can have trouble retrieving the information

6c1 How much do we retain?

    How long do you retain things in short-term memory?

        Remember three letters (f, t, z) and count backwards from 100.
        Before 20 seconds is up, they have totally lost it.

        Short term memory is limited in length as well as capacity. The basic
        rule is that our short-term memory can hold 7 +/- 2 things.

        This rule was discovered by Bell labs - this is why we have 7-digit
        phone numbers!

    How long do you retain things in short-term memory?

        Ebbinghaus' Forgetting Curve - memorize syllables, then given a recall
        test. Curve starts around 60% and drops off after day 1, levels off
        around 20%. Note that this is recall, not recognition - recognition is
        similar, but around 30% higher.

    We can relearn information relatively quickly - Ebbinghaus' Retention Curve

    Number of repititions of a list on day 1 decreases amount of time to relearn
    the material on day 2 - information is being retained somewhere for later
    use.

6c2 Cues that Influence Memory

    Ebbinghaus' ideas can be dramatically influenced by cues

    There are all kinds of different cues

    Semantic cues are helpful for memory

    We were given a semantic a semantic hint for one picture - a study used the
    same pictures with two cues: a midget playing a trombone in a telephone
    booth vs. an early bird who caught a very strong worm.

    Semantic cues for helping memory

        Semantic (type of ...)
        Acoustic (rhymes with ...)
        Visual (written in capitals)

    Cues related to the self-concept are even better

        Best cues for memory are those that can be processed by and relevant to
        the individual

        Understanding how it matters to you lets you remember it easier

        Self-reference effect; self-centred memory.

    Context effects

        Other cues from the environment/situation that you are in

        We're better at remembering things if we are in the same state we were
        in when the information was learnt

        Alcohol and memory studies showed this - getting drun while studying?
        Better write the exam drunk! :P

        Mood - We tend to remember happy things more easily when we are happy,
        and sad things when we are sad - those with depression tend to remember
        only the sad things that they have dealt with.

        Thus scuba divers study - memory exercises between land and water showed
        a very strong context effect if you learn and recall in the same
        environment.

6c3 Interference in Memory

    As we learn more, the new stuff we learn interferes with old stuff we
    learned, and vice-versa.

        e.g. Experienced prof used to remember students' names easily, but after
             learning so many names he has trouble learning new names.

    Learning a new language can facilitate or interfere.

    Proactive interference - French, learned beforehand, interferes proactively
    while learning another language like Spanish - the French word might be
    recalled instead of the Spanish one.

    Retroactive interference - Learning Spanish can make it harder to remember
    your previously-learnt French words.

6c4 Strategies to Improve Memory

    Mnemonics - sayings/patterns developed to remember things

        Only assists you with learning lists, but not understanding the content.

        e.g. OCEAN scale - openness, concientiousness, extroversion,
             agreeability, neuroticism

        Just knowing lists isn't that useful, though.

    Chunking

        Group items together into different groups

        Particularly helpful for short-term memory so that you can remember more
        information.

    That's it for effortful memory

        We know memory isn't as good as we would like, is sensitive to cues, can
        be confused by interfering memories, and can be improved with various
        strategies.

6d Memory Without Awareness

    We can be influenced by many subtle things

    Ocean, moon, barn, house, canoe, sand, salt...

    Write down favourite band, coffee, and a laundry detergent.

        Most people now write down Tide after being primed with the ocean words.

    Study of amnesiacs - somebody who has amnesia.

    Different kinds of amnesia

        Bad head injury can wipe out recent memories

        Epileptic seizures can lose a period of memory

        Amnesiacs have suffered brain damage such that short-term memories never
        make it into long-term memory.

        Dan Schachter - story of the golfer

            Avid golfer can't remember anything - says he can't play golf.
            Goes to play golf and has a perfect swing, uses the lingo, etc. but
            in his mind he felt that it was his first time playing golf.

    Procedural memory

        Able to do something even without being aware of it - without
        consciously knowing what they are able to do.

        Despite having no knowledge, people can learn various tasks.

        McMaster University - famous names study

            Week 1 - subjects given list of names to learn
            Week 2 - pick out from the list of names all of the famous people
            Result: People picked out the names from the list from week 1 as
                    famous people.

        People can learn things without being aware of what they have learned.

        Another test:

            Week 1 - Given subjects a long list of words
            Week 2 - Given a word stem, asked to complete it
            Result: They spell out words from the list

        Favourite example - prof always puts his manual transmission into first
        gear at every stop and couldn't recall where/how/why he learned how to
        do that.

6e The Fragility of Memory

    1970s studies revealed just how fragile our memories can be.

    Memory Construction - The Construction of Automobile Destruction (Elizabeth
    Loftus).

        How fast were they going when they bumped into each other? 30kph
        How fast were they going when they smashed into each other? 45kph
        Was there any broken glass? 20% of "smashed" said yes; 2% of "bumped"
        said no.

    Trials - eye witnesses are supposed to know what really happened - but that
    supposition is incredibly naive.

    We tend to remember what we want to remember.

        UWaterloo - Study Skills course study - 8 weeks at UW

            People remember how much their studying was improved, but really
            just exaggerate how bad they were before they started.

    We paint ourselves in a positive light in our memory.

    Do we forget what we want to forget? That's not so easy. The more we try to
    suppress thoughts, the more ofen they come back.

        Post-traumatic stress disorder

    We can construct memories very well, but blocking them is hard.

    Recovered memories:

        Psychodynamic orientation - repressed memories from traumatic events in
        childhood.

        Others believe childhood memories from are just constructions.

        When people recover memories, it can be from hypnosis, guided imagery,
        etc. But are these false memories? Can we ever recover untainted
        memories?

    Cautions

        Research has shown that some memories children have could be
        constructions, but it's easier to show certain things are false than
        when things are true - e.g. memories of abuse shouldn't be disgarded.

        Younger children, people under hypnosis or guided memory, on certain
        drugs like sodium pentathol, tend to be less accurate.

        Memories people have always had some recollection of tend to be more
        accurate.

        It's more important to do more investigations than to rely solely on
        testimony.

        We can't discern what's a true memory and what's a false memory.

7a Cognitive Psychology II: Perception, Preconceptions and Judgement

Perception - the whole is not equal to the sum of its parts
 - Figure and ground in perception
 - Gestalt principles/view of perception

Our knowledge and preconceptions shape our perceptions
 - Illusions
 - Perceptual set - situation where expectation of seeing something influence
   what we actually percieve

Judgement under uncertainty
 - Heuristics in judgement
 - Artificial intelligence

7b Perception

Gestalt Psychologists

    The whole is not equal to the sum of its parts

        Our thoughts and perceptions shape what we perceive

        We don't perceive reality, but rather our perceptions are our take on
        reality - even though the reality may be out there in the abstract

        We don't se what's exactly out there, our perceptions are shaped by
        our thoughts

        We see through a lens of our thoughts/perceptions

    e.g. Picture of black dots suggests a dalmation
        "You apply meaning to this smattering of dots."
    e.g. Doghouse illusion with big gaps
        "You see a whole dog house - even though it's an impossible object."

    => We perceive things that aren't really there

    Finger and ground in perception

        e.g. Young lady vs old lady painting depending on what you focus on

        Figure stands out, ground is hidden behind and not being percieved at
        the moment that you are looking at it

        e.g. Vase with two faces

        Tho whole can't be equal to the sum of its parts because you can't get
        two answers from the same part

    Gestalt grouping principles

        e.g. 3 pairs of vertical lines - often called 3 groups due to proximity,
        rather than two groups of three lines, etc.

        e.g. 3 columns - of 3 triangles, circles, and triangles, as opposed to
        rows - grouping principle

        e.g. Continuity principle - squiggle with a line through it vs group
        of semicircles

        e.g. Connectedness - 3 dumbells instead of 6 circles and 3 lines

        e.g. The principle of closure - 3 sliced partial circles that suggests
        a triangle in the middle - our mind wants to connect the lines

        e.g. Gestalt principles of good form - we tend to see things as a whole,
        as a gestalt, as a good form, even when it's not there - cube appearing
        from amongst circles with lines overlayed (Necker's cube)

7c Our Knowledge and Preconceptions Shape Our Perceptions

    Gestalt psychologist's contribution to cognitive psychology

     - showed that thoughts and preconceptions (our beliefs) influence what we
       see

    Muller-Lyer Illusion
        A  B  C
        <-->--<

        AB appears shorter than BC

        Western society sees a lot of corners; certain angles imply that a
        corner is pointing away from us => BC is farther away, so it must be
        longer - probably a result from spending lots of times in buildings

    Ponzo Illusion

        Two parallele lines - one on the bottom looks smaller because of our
        view of perspective on the image underneath

        Also - Shepard illusion - monster chasing another down a hallway towards
        the camera

    The Ames Room

        Room angled, with a slanted floor (shrinking the ceiling) gives the
        impression of a giant and a small person - even though they are the same
        size

    When we think about things, that influences our perceptions of the world
    around us - "top-down processing" shows that our preconceptions/beliefs
    influence our view

    Perceptual set - three drawings of a lady's face - first one or last one
    alone look like a saxaphone player, but seen with the middle one they look
    like faces

7d1 Schemas and Heuristics

    Thoughts (in particular, judgements) are influenced by the way we think
    about the world

    Schemas - ways in which we think about the world, and how we come to
    understand it - summary of what we think the world is like

    Heuristics - simple ways to think about things - shortcut strategies used
    for decision making

    Why do we need schemas?

        Too much information - must decide what we pay attention to - must
        summarize to process/memorize, or communicate to others

        Allow us to go beyond the information given

            e.g. paragraph of "gibberish"
                 LAUNDRY! -> paragraph makes sense now

    Like illusions, heuristics tell us how to process information

        Representativeness heuristic

            e.g. Question - "Linda is a bank teller" or "Linda is a bank teller
            and active in the feminist movement" - people are drawn to say the
            latter because she sounds like a feminist, so they pick the
            representative answer

            e.g. More words in English with K as the first letter of as third
            letter? - the latter, surprisingly - because it's hard to think
            about them

            e.g. If you go to the middle east, should you be concerned about
            terrorist attacks or traffic accidents? - the latter

7d2 UW Research: Priming and Time Judgements (Dr. Jennifer Stolz)

    By priming a concept, judgements about timing can be affected.

    Half of participants - each trial begins with short prime, like "bacon" on a
    screen.

    Other participants get no prime.

    Two different words appear on the screen at almost the same time (~20-100ms)
    with one related to the prime (e.g. eggs).

    Subject is asked which word appeared first.

    Not primed -> equally likely to pick either word
    Primed -> more likely to think eggs appeared first

    Because the concept was primed in your head, it appears to be presented more
    quickly than it actually was

7d3 Artificial Intelligence - Do people think like computers?

    Computers and the development of computers had a big impact on cognitive
    psychology

        Information processing - new model "the computer metaphor" to reason
        about how people thought of things.

    AI was an area of psychology that grew in the 1970s and 80s

    Do people think like computers?

        Early on, computers were a metaphor for how people thought

        When cognitive psychology became popular, we started trying to get
        computers to think like people

         - It could give insight into how people think about things

    Recall how we talked about "encoding", "storage", and "retrieval"?

    Useful to model theoretical thought processes on a computer

    Big lesson - thought is complex and people don't think about things
    consistently - computers and people don't think in the same way - it would
    be very difficult to get a computer to use the same sorts of heuristics that
    we do

8a Clinical Psychology I: Psychology Disorders

    Five different classes of disorders

        Anxiety Disorders (Phobias)

        Mood Disorders (Depression, Bipolar Disorder)

        Psychotic Disorders (Schizophrenia)

        Dissociative Disorders (Multiple Personality Disorder/Dissociative
        Identity)

        Personality Disorders

        Book - DSM-IV categorizes disorders - first axis is the first four
        things, personality disorders are a separate, second axis

8b Anxiety Disorders

    Phobias

        Irrational fear of something you really don't have to be afraid of

        Fairly common condition

        Story about prof's son - scared of dogs, even small terrier, for some
        reason

        Very treatable

        Graph of phobias and scary things - 40% Very afraid of snakes, etc. vs
        "bothered slightly" vs "not at all afraid of it"

        People's phobias are logical - snakes can be poisonous, claustrophobia
        can suggest death from suffocation

        People aren't scared of driving cars, for some reason.

    Generalized Anxiety Disorder - Panic Disorder

        Overwhelming sense of anxiety

        Not localized as being caused by a particular thing

        Can become quite debilitating

        Associated with panic attacks (with panic disorders)

            e.g. Agorophobia - fear of open placesm being outside

             - Some cases where people stayed inside for 20 years

    Obsessive Compulsive Disorder

        Can vary from mildy to extremely obsessive and debilitating

        16 year old boy worried about germs everywhere

        Washed his hands about 2000 times a day

        Would spend all of his time washing his hands but neglecting the rest
        of his body, pooping his pants, etc.

        Repetitive thoughts - boy thinking that he is being poisoned

        Repetitive behaviours - checking things over and over again - a few
        times isn't debilitating, but a few hundred times can be

        Obsessions (repetitive thoughts):
            
            dirt/germs/toxins: 40% (among children/adolescents with OCD)
            something terrible happening: 24%
            Symmetry, order, exactness: 17%

        Compulsions (repetitive behaviours):
        
            excessive handwashing, bathing, grooming: 85%
            repeating rituals (in/out of door, chair): 51%
            checking doors, locks, appliances, brakes, homework: 46% 

    Lots of ways to treat anxiety disorders

        Psychanalytic perspective - therapy

            Solves some deep lying problem which is causing the disorder

            Freud's Little Hans case study

                Developed his ideas about Oedipus complex

                Little Hans was very afraid of horses

                Freud only talked to Hans' parents

                Debilitating phobia back then - horses everywhere

                Freud believed that Little Hans had anxiety arising from Oedipus
                complex transferred onto horses; terrified that the father might
                castrate him; horses have large penises and wear blinders, like
                his father's glasses
        
        Learning perspective

            Thinks people gain phobias like Little Albert - being afraid of
            small, furry animals

            Anxiety gained by associating stimuli with something aversive

            Can generalize from one thing to another

            Treatment via unconditioning, e.g. virtual reality training

            OCD - dealt with by rewarding people for not doing their compulsions

        Social cognitive perspective

            Observational learning

            Developed certain phobias by watching others and observing what they
            are afraid of

                e.g. Prof is slightly uncomfortable with dogs -> his son is
                afraid of them

            Use models who are doing non-fearful  behaviour to help overcome the
            fear

        Biological perspective

            OCD can be treated by drugs in some cases

            Phobias fall into natural categories over hsitory - inborn
            biological fears
            
8b) Mood Disorders

    In particular, depression.

    Major Affective Disorder

        AKA unipolar depression
        Profoundly depressed and lasting over six months
        Can interfere dramatically with your life
        Fairly common, and pretty treatable

        Other symptoms:
            - poor appetite
            - insomnia
            - feeling worthless
            - loss of interest in others
            - sleeping 14-15 hours a day (or insomnia)
            - weight gain due to lack of activity
            - persistant
            - clear thoughts of suicide "almost all people who commit suicide
              have depression"

    Bipolar Depression

        Seen as a more extreme version of unipolar depression.
        Used to be called manic depression.
        Extreme highs and lows
        Low side is major affective disorder or unipolar depression
        High side is euphoric, grandiose, feeling unstoppable

        e.g. Patiient's baseball story

            "I was quite good, semi pro, eventually made the major leagues,
             won three games as a pitcher. Also I was the top ace in the U.S.
             military and got to meet the president. Then I decided to run for
             president, and I became the president. Then, I decided to become
             god! I still am god!"

        Negative side of euphoria - easily agitated, can be violent, reckless,
        risk-taking, wasting money

        A number of famous people who have been manic depressive - Winston
        Churchill, poets.

        Pressured speech - words being pushed out before they are even fully
        formed. Usually someone in this state is bouncing off the walls with
        energy and not sleeping.

        Rate of mood change:
         - Rapid cycling (hours/days)
         - Months, or even years
         - Seems to vary within people

        Women suffer from depression more than men (10% of 18-24 year olds vs
        5% for men).
        Men are more likely to kill themselves than women, though.

    Explanation of Mood Disorders

        Psychoanalytic perspective
         - depression is anger turned inward
         - part of the therapy is to express your anger at the appropriate
           target

        Biological perspective
         - strong genetic influences - both unipolar and bipolar disorders run
           in the same family
         - certain neruotransmitters there seems to be a depletion in depressed
           individuals - in particular, noradrenalin and seratonin
         - drugs that elevate the levels of noradrenalin and seratonin are
           effective anti-depressants
         - do the highs and lows of bipolar balance out eventually?
            - probably not
            - may be due to poor regulation of neurotransmitters in the synapse
            - neruotransmitter levels may sometimes be too high, and sometimes
              too low

        Social cognitive perspective
         - treatments combine drugs with social cognitive approach are most
           affective
         - attributions for failure as internal, stable, or global
            - internal: it's my fault
            - stable: it's always going to be this way
            - global: it will affect my whole life
         - vicious cycle of negative thoughts/moods
         - therapy can break this vicious cycle

8d Psychotic Disorders - Schizophrenia

    Thinking is scattered; people don't make any sense.

    Disorganized thinking
    Delusions - beliefs that are provably false but they still believe it
    Often delusions of persecution, e.g. "the CIA is spying on me"
    Disturbed perceptions
     - auditory hallucinations (hearing voices/sounds that aren't there)
     - inappropriate emotions and actions
        - catatonia - can be posturing
        - emotions not matching the situation
     - social withdrawl
        - don't like spending time with people or having anything to do with
          others
     - flat affect
        - no emotion/responsiveness
        - monotone voice

    Types of Schizophrenia:
     - Paranoid (preoccupied with delusions/hallucinations)
     - Disorganized (speech, behaviour, or emotions)
     - Catatonic (immobility, negativism, parrotlike repeating of others)
     - Undifferentiated (catch-all; many and varied symptoms)
     - Residual (withdrawl, after hallucinations/delusions disappeared)

    Two types of symptoms that stand out:
     - positive symptoms (delusions, hallucinations)
     - negative emotions (social withdrawl, inappropriate emotions, and flatness
       or affect)

    Explanations of Schizophrenia

        Psychoanalytic perspective
         - focus on unconscious
         - Freud believed unconscious was irrational
         - he thought that schizophrenia was the overflowing of the irrational
           unconscious

        Biological perspective
         - genetic influences
         - brain neurotransmitters (dopamaine)
         - one schizophrenic twin means the other has a 50% chance of having it

        Social cognitive perspective
         - Stress Diathesis Model
         - suggest schizophrenia is a combination of two things
         - genetic predisposition is combined with stress experienced

8e Dissociative Disorders - Multiple Personalies

    Note: very different from schizophrenia.
    Consciousness can be divided, can lose sense of who they are
    Fugue State
     - a person disappears and becomes someone totally different
       "woke up and started a new life"
     - skeptics say that individuals may just be purposefully leaving their life
       behind
     - never the same person at the same time

    Dissociative Identity Disorders
     - one body can be different identities, often in threes
     - Three Faces of Eve - Eve White, Eve Black, and Jane
       "Went through fifteen sets of three personalities."
     - is this real?
        - some say this is a real, serious problem
           - there are distinct patterns of brain activities
           - seen as a way to cope with anxiety
           - may be a result of abuse or trauma as a child
             "being different people in order to cope"
        - some say it isn't real
           - social phenomena created by hypnosis in therapy
           - between 1930-1960 there were two cases per decade
           - in the 1980s there were 20000 cases

8f Personality Disorders

    Traditionally seen as a very different type of disorder; classified
    differently by psychiatrists (medical doctors).
    Difficulty getting along wiht other people.
    Ranges dramatically.
    Most prominant/important: Antisocial Personality Disorder
        - Almost as if they have no conscience
        - Can commit brutal acts
        - Can be very charming or charismatic
        - Many famous mass murderers have antisocial personality disorders
        - Not upset/aroused by acts that hurt other people, etc.
        - Coherent thinking; seem normal

    Histrionic
     - 95% diagnosed are women
    Narcissistic
     - 80% diagnosed are male
    Borderline personality
     - mostly women

    All three above:
     - impulsive
     - dramatic
     - dramatic style of relating to others
     - can't get along with other people
     - tend to be strongly disliked

    Avoidant Personality Disorders
     - high anxiety and social withdrawl
     - nowadays would be said to have social phobia

    Schizoid Personality Disorder
     - mild form of schizophrenia
     - eccentric behaviour
     - classified by social withdrawl, magical thoughts

    Classifications of Personality Disorders
     - Antisocial: destructive people, no conscience
     - Histrionic, Narcissistic, and Borderline: terrible ways of interacting
       with others
     - Avoidant and Schizoid: weak forms of other disorders

Clinical Psychology II: Therapies - The Big Picture

    Some disorders are easier dealt with than others
    
    Anxiety disorders
     - often cognitive behaviour therapies and phobias
     - almost 50% (85% of new) therapists are CBT

    Mood disorders
     - major depressive disorder; medication and therapy

    Schizophrenia
     - medication therapy

    Evaluating therapies
     - is therapy effective?
     - if so, why?

9b Anxiety Disorders

    Phobias
     - extremely high success rate in therapy
     - usually treated with cognitive therapy
        - e.g. Calmly looking at a picture of a spider from a distance, work up
          to a toy spider. eventually a live spider. Systemmatic desensitization
          that slowly exposes you to the phobia.
        - cognitive => thoughts trying to be controlled (peaceful, calming
          thoughts)
        - behavioural => a behaviour being done

    Cognitive Behavioural Therapy

        Getting people to engage in behaviours that will help them out while
        using their thoughts to encourage and develop those behaviours

    More serious anxiety disorders
     - Agorophobia, social phobia, obsessive compulsive disorder
     - Usually treated with a combination of drug therapy and cognitive therapy

9c Mood Disorders

    Usually treated with both CBT and medication

    Cognitive therapy for depressions
     - recall that people tend to make a catastrophe of all events in their
       lives
     - so we focus on the negative thoughts that depressed people have
       "it doesn't have to ruin your life"
       "when your kids get in trouble, it isn't your fault"

    Depression scores
     - cognitive training patients are much less depressed (3 months?)
     - people who are waiting got marginally less depressed
     - (each without drugs)
     - 15-20% of people seeking therapy are experiencing major depression
        - don't respond to drugs or therapy
        - often become suicidal
        - can turn to Electro-Convulsive Therapy (ECT) "shock therapy"
           - in 40s and 50s this was used as a punishment
           - anesthesia is used, and electric current is applied to only
             one half of the brain
           - still very controversial/debated; we don't understand how it works
           - number of shocks varies per person

    30-40% with depression will get better without any treatment in 6-9 months.

    Bipolar Disorder

        Primarily treated with medication (Lithium)

    Schizophrenia

        Primarily treated with medication

        Doing therapy with someone who isn't making sense is too hard

    Group therapy is often included with Bipolar/Schizophrenia

        Allows you to deal with the stigma of having a mental illness

        The stigma can control poeples' expectations

        Can even affect how poeple are treated/viewed within mental hospitals

    On Being Sane in Insane Places - Study by Rosenhan

        Participant observation study

        Had a group of graduate students go to a mental institution claiming
        that they were hearing voices

        Of 15 graduate students, 14 were admitted and 11 were diagnosed as
        schizophrenic

        It took the mental health professionals weeks to figure out that these
        individuals were not suffering from schizophrenia - 9 of 15 had to tell
        them the truth first

        Writing notes observing the hospital were interpreted as paranoid
        behaviour

        This shows hwo strong the expectations of being crazy can colour other
        peoples' views

        Also shows that best intentions can lead to difficulties

        Therapies and treatments may not always be of benefit to the individual,
        and that there is room for improvement

9e Evaluating Psychotherapies

    Memory and hypnosis - suggested that hypnosis could create false memories,
    bad things that didn't really happen

    Therapies must be evaluated to ensure that they will help

    Do psychotherapies really help people?

9e1 What does it mean for therapy to be effective?

    Does the person get better? How do you decide?
    Should the patient decide if the therapy is effective or not?
    When people want to get better they will say they are better even if they
    aren't

    e.g. UW's flawed study skills workshop

    What about the word of the therapist's word?
     - motivated to see improvements
     - motivated by career reputation

    Have a pre-test and a post-test; measure at the beginning and at the end.
     - Not so easily accomplished
     - Spontaneous remission: some people get better without assistance
     - most people will coem in for therapy when they are at their worst

    Regression to the mean
     - statistical problems
     - any score is partly based on chance, and partly based on real measurement
       of what you are trying to measure
     - high depression scores reported initially due to distress
     - scores trend downwards even if there is no change in depression

    What does this mean? How do we fix it?
     - common to provide a standard, proven treatment and also try a new
       treatment thought to be more effective
     - often a setup the patient is concerned about
     - that behaviour is a progress indicator

9e2 Focus on UW Research on Therapy Effectiveness

    Research by Johnathan Oakman on Social Phobias
     - social phobics are afraid of interactions with other people
     - all clients recieved medication therapy
     - three conditions
        - control: guided self help; 16 weekly therapist meetings
        - standard CBT: done in group
        - CBT with technology; use of videotaping of interactions and role play
          "I must've looked so nervous... oh wait, I looked normal!"

     - at the beginning and at the end they introduced a new social interaction
     - the result showed all three conditions work to the same degree
     - mean time of social phobics here was 18 years

     What does this mean?
      - you need to make the case that therapy is effective, and show that it is
        cost effective

9e3 Is Psychotherapy Effective?

    Across the spectrum, the answer would be yes, but not by a huge amount.
    [Two bell-shaped curves of outcomes; therapy bell translated right quite a
     bit]

    80% of untreated people have poorer outcomes than the average treated person

    Are some therapies better than others?
     - studies show that one deos not seem better than the other
     - a couple studies show that certain therapies are better for certain
       disorders (like systemmatic desensitization for phobias)
     - experience and education seem to have little affect on ability of a
       therapist

    What makes therapy effective?
     - seemingly just the personal interaction with somebody else; a personal
       relationship
     - gives people a sense of optimism and hope

10a Social Psychology I: The Power of the Situation

Kurt Lewin and his two classic statements
 - behaviour is a function of the person and the situation
 - there is nothing wuite so practical as a good theory

Conformity and Obedience (in Nazi Germany)

Bystander Intervention (Why do people not do anything when someone needs help?)
 - often the opposite reasons of what you would expect

10b Kurt Lewin and His Two Classic Statements

Kurt Lewin
 - the father of the field of social psychology
 - most people in the field can trace their training back to him
 - very eclectic psychologist
 
 1. Behaviour is a function of the person and the situation.
  - the power of the situation must be examined alongside behaviour
  - that statement has been fundamental in the understanding of social
    psychology
  - most people think that they are not controlled by the situation
  - social psychologists believe that most people can be treated the same and
    are affected in the same way by the situation

  2. There is nothing quite so practical as a good theory
   - approach of social psychology is that you need to have a good theory about
     what is going on to understand and do something about a problematic
     situation
   - concerned with real issues that have a powerful affect on people

10c Conformity and Obedience

The Sherif Norm Formation Study
 - wanted to understand how people came to have a certain set of beliefs and
   why these are shared throughout society
 - Sherif thought of these beliefs as norms
 - took advantage of a perceptual illusion called the Autokinetic Effect
    - pinpoint of light fixed on a dark room wall looks like it is moving,
      since the movement of our eyes is hard to sense, it looks like it's
      moving
    - asked people how much the light moved
    - people's estimates become consistant over time
    - people with estimates placed in the same room tend to equalize their
      estimates
    - groups of people ended up giving a census estimate
    - a confederate was thrown into the group to give a really small number
      or a really big number, swaying the consensus

The Solomon Asch Conformity Study
 - was a Jewish contemporary of Lewin who also fled Nazi Germany
 - thought that he would find more conformity in Germany than in the US
 - would people say that long was short if pressured by conformity?
    - everyone looked at three lines and picked the standard line on their own
    - but when 7 people before you say 'line 3' (the shorter line), people
      changed their answers
    - 70% of people in the study gave the wrong answer at least once
    - so, almost everyone went with the group, despite unambiguous stimuli

The Stanley Milgrim Obedience Study
 - felt that Asch's study did not explain the horrendous acts of Nazi Germany
 - tested whether people would obey authority
 - will people commit acts of cruelty just because they are told to?
    - subjects are told that electric shocks will help people learn
    - teacher instructs student to shock a confederate who gets small shocks
      and acts nervous; acts in pain
    - most subjects went to 300 volts (confederate goes silent)
    - 63% of subjects keep going to 450 volts
 - conclusion: we are a lot more susceptible to social pressure and obeying
   authority figures than would be recognized
 - psychiatrists estimated less then one tenth of one percent would have done
   it
 - women and men both come out to 63%
 - Situation is very powerful. Why?
    - person feels trapped; they agreed to do this
    - only do 15 volt steps each time
    - experimenter doesn't make it easy for the subject to stop
 - very controversial study; led to ethics review boards
 - only one of 40 regretted being in this experiment

10d Bystander Intervention

Kitty Genovese (1968)
 - viciously attacked outside her apartment building
 - 23 people were woken up and heard her scream, each one heard her,
   but police weren't called until after the crime was done
 - common sense notion was that new yorkers just didn't care

Latane and Darley
 - wanted a theory to understand this
 - most people believe safety in numbers
 - Latane and Darley believe that the more people that are around,
   the less likely they are to help
 
 Smoke filled room study
  - 55% report smoke in their room when alone
  - 12% report the smoke when in a group of three
 
 The Seizure Study
  - set up so that no one else is there to respond
  - man fakes a seizure
  - likelihood of someone helping is a direct, negative relation
    of how many other people are available to help
  - "breaking down on a lonely road is better than a busy one"
 
 Model of Helping
  - learning this phenomenon makes it less likely to happen
  - to help, someone must:
     - notice the incident
     - interpret the incident as an emergency "everyone tries to be cool"
     - assume responsibility "it's my job to help" "diffusion of 
       responsibility"
  - once someone attempts to help, there is a conformity effect
    - one person seeing the incident as an emergency cues others to come
      and help11a Social Psychology II: The Perceiver Shapes Reality and the Interaction of
    the Person and the Situation
    
    Three basic units:
     - the power of the situation
     - the power of the person "the perceiver shapes reality"
        - fundamental attribution error "why someone did something"
        - stereotyping "a distortion of reality"
        - self-fulfilling prophecies "believing it makes it true"
     - the interaction of the person and the situation
        - the two factor theory of emotion
        - cognitive dissonance theory
        - prof's research: stereotype threat

11b Fundamental Attribution Error
    
The Origin of Fundamental Attribution Error
 - study from a group of psychologists, in particular Fritz Heider
 - brought a Gestalt tradition
    - the whole isn't the sum of its parts, etc.
 - the whole not equal to the sum of its parts is most relavent to understanding
   other people
 - person perception is a natural extension from the perception of objects

When you perceive somebody, how do you decide what type of person they are?
 - Heider focused on the idea that seeing a behaviour invokes the question,
   "why did they do it?"
 - dispositional attribution - attributing behaviour to the person
    - "I punched him because I'm a mean person."
 - situational attribution - behaviour influenced by the situation
    - "I punched him because he dissed my mother."
 - what is the reason for the person's behaviour?

What do people do when they see someone engage in a behaviour?

Jones and Harris Study (1967)
 - subjects read pro or anti-Castro essays (after Cuban missile crisis)
 - the situation was that either the individual chose to write the essay or
   they were given no choice
    - does the produced essay reflect their real attitudes?
       - according to attribution theory, "I don't know".
 - being forced to write a pro-Castro essay didn't make people more pro-Castro
 - people would assume that they wrote it because that's the type of person
   they are, despite being forced to write that essay
    - this is the fundamental attribution error

The Ross, Amabile, and Steimetz Game Show Study (1977)
 - one person was the "host", the other is the contestant
    - "people assume Alex Trebek is smart"
 - questioner got to pick 10 things that they thought they knew and somebody
   else would be unlikely to know (in the public domain)
 - there were also observers watching the "game show"
 - since the "host" was chosen by chance, the two people should be similar
 - contestants even believe that the host is smart

"The behaviour engulfs the field"
 - behaviour (figure) stands out; the situation is ground
 - the focus on the person attributes the behaviour to them
 - culture plays a big role; a lot stronger in western cultures
    - emphasis on independance and autonomy; people make their own choices
    - eastern cultures emphasize harmonious relations and responibilities
       - easterners more sensitive to the situation

11b2 Stereotyping
 - based on a certain characterization of what members of a specific group
   are like
 - some stereotypes are acceptable (e.g. lawyers)
 - other stereotypes are less acceptable (e.g. ethnicity)
 - lead to an expectation of what we think people are going to be like,
   and we tend to read that into their behaviour
 - particular content will be read into their behaviour

Study by Darley and Gross (1983)
 - people come in and act as a teacher
 - watch 9 year old Hannah take a standardized test
 - Hannah's performance is baffling - mixed bag of hard and easy
   questions correct
 - asked to determine how smart Hannah is
 - stereotype set up - Hannah picked up in front of a huge mansion vs.
   a trailer park
 - half of the subjects judged how smart she was before watching her 
   performance, after just watching the video
 - expectations were much higher for "rich" Hannah, especially after seeing
   her confusing test performance

The automatic activation of stereotypes affects evaluation - Devine (1989)
 - people sometimes rely on and use stereotypes without even being conscious
   that they are
 - Devine wanted to see if activating a stereotype about people of colour,
   without knowing it, could affect the evaluation of a person whose race is
   unknown
 - submiminally primed with stereotype-related words flashing on the screen
 - asked to read a story about Donald, a jerk
 - asked, "how aggressive is Donald?"
 - when primed with African American stereotype, people saw Donald as more
   agressive, despite their level of prejudice
 - presumably it would also affect evaluation of meeting a person of colour
   in real life

UWaterloo study by Sinclair and Kunda (1999)
 - subjects gave an oral presentation where they pitch themselves to a job
   position
 - the person evaluates the manager who is either black or white, with 
   positive or negative feedback
 - people dislike the manager more after negative feedback if they are black
 - "we use the stereotype to reach our desired conclusions"

11b3 Self-Fulfilling Prophecies
 - the prophecy fulfills itself
 - the prophecy, the beliefs, creates its own reality and makes it happen
 - e.g. thinking the stock market will crash leads to people withdrawing
   their money, crashing the stock market

The Pygmalion Effect in the Classrom - Rosenthal and Jacobson (1968)
 - the belief that someone can become good and successful will become
   good and successful
 - five children picked at random from a number of elementary classes
 - teachers told that they are late bloomers, soon-to-be geniuses
 - these children ended up doing better
 - the expectation of the teacher of them to become smarter actually makes
   them smarter
 - how does this happen?

Self-Fulfilling Prophecies in Dating - Snyder, Tanke and Bersheid (1977)
 - men and women asked to meet a stranger over the phone
 - had fake portfolios of what the other person was like
 - the men were given all the same information, the only difference was in
   the manipulated photograph of the woman that they believed they were
   speaking to
 - videotaped each talker separately; asked people how they behaved
 - men were a lot nicer to the women they thought were attractive
 - what is assumed is that attractive women are more desirable, friendlier,
   and nicer
 - the "what's beautiful is good" stereotype
 - would that stereotype create its own reality?
 - women's responses were the start of the self-fulfilling prophecy
 - women seen as unattractive responded less kindly

Model for Creating a Self-Fulfilling Prophecy

    1. Perceiver's expectations
    2. Perceiver's behaviour toward the target
    3. Target's behaviour toward the perceiver

11c1 The Two-Factor Theory of Emotion

Early Models of Emotion

    William James
     - believed that emotions are experienced because we act a certain way
     - e.g. running from a bear makes you scared
     - reaction is first physiological
    
    Cannon and Baird argued the opposite
     - first understand it, then that leads to the emotional reaction
    
    Two Factor Theory
     - parts of both of these arguments
     - physiological arousal AND cognitive interpretation of the physiological
       arousal
     - the two factors are the physiological arousal, and the cognitive 
       arousal
     - theory argues that emotions stem from physiological arousal
        - e.g. sweating, heart pumping, etc.
     - cognitive label supplied to arousal to determine emotion
       - sweating => scared OR excited?
     
Anger and Your Mother Study - Schacter and Singer (1962)
 - wanted to see how psychological arousal together with a label, could
   go together to create the emotional reaction of anger
 - told subjects they were studying vision
 - shots given; told they will be aroused or not aroused
 - 1/3 were given a placebo
 - asked to complete a questionaire with another person
 - confederate gets angry
 - how many men has your mother had sex with other than your father?
    - 4-6, 6-10, 20 or more
 - questions also asks the subjects to rate their feelings
 - people with physiological arousal but no explanation
    - they used the explanation from the situation
    - these people had heightened anger
 
The Attraction and the Bridge - Dutton and Aron (1974)
 - high, rickety bridge (arousing)
 - attractive and unattractive woman meets a guy on the high bridge or
   a low bridge
 - asked to complete a questionaire
 - physiological arousal - misinterpreted as being caused by attraction
   for the woman? (given her number)
 - independant variable - do they call her?
 - physiological arousal + high bridge = love! (label)
 - low bridge, no physiological arousal = not as attracted
 - way more guys called her after meeting on the high bridge (50%) vs
   the low bridge

11c2 Cognitive Dissonance Theory
 - between 1962 and 1967, it dominated social psychology by far (90% of 
   studies!)
 - theory developed by Leon Festinger (mot famous of Lewin's students)
 - Festinger wanted to understand what happens when we have thoughts that
   don't go together
 - thought much of our psychology is making sense of these conflicting
   thoughts
 - argued that we get uncomfortable/anxious when thoughts don't fit
   together, which motivates us to make the easiest change to erase the
   conflict

Participant Observation Study - Festinger and Schacter
 - found out about a cult
 - they predicted that the world was going to end
 - sold their houses when told that only the followers will be saved
 - Festinger predicted what would happened to this cult
 - what happens to these people when the world doesn't end?
    - conflicting cognitions
    - rationalized that their cult had saved the world rather than being
      misguided

How much money would it take to get you to lie? - Festinger and
Carlsmith (1959)
 - had subjects asked them to turn pegs on a board for half an hour
 - experimenter explains that they want you to tell the next participant
   that it was a fun experiment
 - offered $1 or $20 to agree to do this
 - control => not fun
    - no dissonance
 - $20 => still not very far
    - money explains discrepancy "I did it for the money"
 - $1 => very fun
    - conflicting thoughts => you decide that it WAS fun

Model of Cognitive Dissonance
 - enjoyable
    - no external reward
       - self-perception: "I do this because I like it"
          - intrinsic motivation
    - external reward
       - self-perception: "I do this because I'm paid to"
          - extrinsic motivation
 
 The fact that you lied cannot be changed, or at least not without
 changing how you feel about the task.

The Role of Arousal in Cognitive Dissonance - Zanna and Cooper (1974)
 - cognitive dissonance interpretation is unique because conflicting
   thoughts cause arousal, anxious, nervous, and upset
 - uses two factor theory to connect arousal to Cognitive Dissonance
 - most students don't like tuition increases
 - had subjects compose an essay which was supposedly submitted to the
   Board of Governors as an argument for the tuition increase
 - in other condition, an illusion was created that people had a choice
   about doing it - high choice condition
    - board member pleads to class that they desperately need support for a
      tuition increase, but told they are free to choose
 - applied another level to the study so that they had high and low choice,
   but also took a pill
 - pill was said to cause arousal or calming
    - arousal from dissonance could be blamed as the pill
    - "placebo; made of jello"
    - high dissonance from calming pill - changed their attitude a lot

11c3 University of Waterloo Research Focus - Stereotype Threat
 - prof's research!
 - stereotype existing undermines that group's performance
 - even if they don't believe the stereotype, they worry about portraying or
   confirming the stereotype

Intellectual Test Performance and Group Differences - A Bit of History
 - group differences on intellectual test performance has been a contentious
   issue
 - some of the early intelligence tests justified certain groups of society
   being above others - Eugenics Movement
 - has effected immigration policies in Canada and U.S.
 - group differences may actually be about the stereotypes than they are about
   actual differences in ability or potential

Demonstrating the Effect of Stereotype Threat on Intellectual Test Performance -
Spencer, Steele and Quinn (1999)
 - looked at stereotype threat and women's performance on Math tests
 - some told there are no gender differences on this test, so gender is now
   irrelavent
 - some told there are gender differences, but not about the direction of the
   bias; it is assumed that men do better
 - When told about gender differences, men scored a bit higher than usual (26%),
   and women scored significantly lower (7%).
 - When told there are no gender differences, men and women scored about the
   same (19% vs 17%). 
 - There is a substantial detriment being caused by the concern about gender
   differences and having to worry about confirming the stereotype.
 - When told a test is under construction and non-diagnostic of their ability,
   minorities score much better.
 - In post-communist Poland, women were encouraged to do Math and were impacted
   less by the stereotype threat.

The Impact of Stereotypic Commercials on Women's Math Performance - Davies,
Spencer, Quinn and Gerhardstein (2001)
 - watching stereotypic commercials don't affect men's performance, but
   negatively affect women's performances

The Impact of Stereotypic Commercials on Women's Career Aspirations - Davies,
Spencer, Quinn and Gerhardstein (2001)
 - had subjects watch stereotypic commercials and rate desire to enroll in
   different majors, and different careers, before and after watching
 - dip in quantitative careers after watching stereotypic commercials for
   women, and rise in verbal careers
 - no affect on men
 - neutral commercials have no affect

12a Applications of Psychology: Sex, Success, and Health
 - the psychology of sex
 - achievement motivation
 - the psychology of health

The Psychology of Sex
 - not studied much until about 60 years ago
 - Kinsey (biological approach)
 - Masters and Johnson (studied people having sex)
 - culture and sex

Achievement Motivation
 - what drives people to get ahead in life
 - intrinsic motivation (doing something because you want to, not to please or
   to make money)
 - leadership styles

The Psychology of Health
 - stress and disease
 - maintaining good health

12b The Psychology of Sex

The Kinsey Report
 - Kinsey was a biologist at the University of Indiana
 - wanted to understand more about sex, and what people thought about it
 - interviewed 18000 people about sexual practices
    - only people who were willing to talk about it
 - in the 40s and 50s, this may be a reflection of those who were a little more
   free with their sexual attitudes
 - Kinsey had a unique way of asking questions, assuming people had done things
   to force a yes
 - "people were pretty kinky"

Research from last 10 years reflects a better estimation of sexual behaviour
 - random sample of population (e.g. census)
 - make sure that it's completely anonymous
 - more representative surveys suggest people are more boring than Kinsey
   suggested
    - over 75% surveyed have never had an affair while married
    - Kinsey had reported that about 80% of men and 50% of women had
      extramarital affairs
 - people still do a number of different sexual activites, but not as common as
   Kinsey had suggested

Masters and Johnson's Study of the Sexual Response Cycle (50s)
 - wanted to know what happened to people when they were having sex
 - what physiological responses people experience, and how do they describe that
   experience
 - had subjects have sex in the lab while hooked up to wires for 
   physiological readings
 - findings are now common knowledge

    Sexual Response Cycle
     - excitement phase
        - bodies change, blood pressure rises, changes in the sexual organs
     - plateau phase
        - building up the excitement; blood pressure continues to rise
     - orgasm
        - something that people did not talk about; debates about womens'
          orgasms
     - resolution phase
        - coming down, relaxing, body returns to normal states

 - findings have been helpful for people with people who have sexual problems
 - problems can be divided into different phases, and corrective excercises can
   be created

Culture and Sex

    Media images and satisfaction of partners
     - how does a man feel about his partner when he looks at pictures of a
       beautiful woman?
        - true for both genders: seeing beautiful images of someone else makes
          you less satisfied with your partner
     - one of the big changes in society is the availability of these images

    Changes in sexual practices across cultures and times
     - percentage of children born to unwed mothers
        - western world: rising! (5% in 60s to 30-40% in 2000)
           - girls enter puberty ~2 years than they used to (average age is 12)
           - average age of marriage has gone up dramatically
           - in 2001 the average age of marriage was 30.5 for women and 32 for
             men, including second marriages
           - for first marriages, it's 28 for women and 30.5 for men
           - provides more opportunity for premarital children
           - married women are giving birth to much fewer children
           - attitudes have changed significantly from the 60s to the 2000s
        - Japan: flat, near zero!

12c Achievement Motivation

Two types of achievement motivation:
 - extrinsically driven by the rewards one will receive
    - reading 1000 pages and get pizza, kids!
 - intrinsically driven because one really wants to do it

Daycare Magic Markers Study - Lepper, Greene, and Nisbett (1973)
 - brought kids magic markers
    - control condition: "colour with these markers if you want to"
    - second condition: "if you draw a nice picture, you will get a reward"
    - third condition: a surprise reward after drawing a picture

 - a week later, magic markers were put out
    - finding: rewards wreck intrinsic motivation
       - least playtime with expected reward group
       - surprised award group had little impact

    Basic principle - when people know that they are going to be rewarded for
    something ahead pf time, they don't know if they are doing it because they
    reward it.

    Promised rewards undermine people's intrinsic motivation.

Building Intrinsic Motivation
 - Mom: "I'll give you $5 for every A."
    - Child: "As long as she pays, I'll study." (extrinsic motivation)
 - Mom: "Your grades were great! Let's celebrate by going out to dinner!"
    - Child: "I love doing well!" (intrinsic motivation)

Leadership Style

Fiedler's research on task and social leadership
 - wanted to see which leaders were good leaders
    - e.g. Bobby Knight - a tyrant, tolerates no shenanigans
    - e.g. more social leaders - involved, interested, makes people happy
 - which type of leader gets the most out of their players?
    - social leader is usually better overall, but
    - if the team is terrible, the task-oriented leader does the best, or
      if the team is really good (pushes them the extra mile)

12d The Psychology of Health

Placebo Effect
 - works for high blood pressure, heart attacks, angina
 - Journal of the American Medical Association (Fall 2001)
    - argues that the placebo effect is overblown
    - studies forgot to take into accoun the regression to the mean
    - when regression to the mean is taken into account, placebo effect is often
      smaller
 - known to be useful in helping people deal with pain
 - when people think they are getting pain medication they seem to do better

Stress
 - understanding of stress and how problematic it can be for our physical health
   has driven health psychology
    - e.g. prof stressed out about taking care of kids and cooking thanksgiving
      dinner; wife stressed out much differently about her mom's potential death
 - general adaption syndrome "very biological reaction"
    - phase 1: alarm reaction (mobilize resources)
    - phase 2: resistance (cope with stressor)
    - phase 3: exhaustion (reserves depleted)
 - control is important
    - if there is a feeling of control, the situation is much less stressful
       - e.g. executive rat that can spin a wheel to avoid getting shocked
         doesn't get sick and die
    - the appraisal of the situation is crucial in determining the level of
      stress
       - stressful event
          - appraisal: Threat "Yikes, this is beyond me!"
             - response: panic, freeze up
          - appraisal: Challenge "I've got to apply all I know."
             - response: aroused, focused
 - feeling of panicked stress negatively impacts the immune system
    - Lymphocytes don't work as well
    - increased cholesterol
    - more prone to cancer and heart disease

Promoting Health - Do's and Dont's
 Do's:
 - getting lots of exercise
 - relaxation
 - best reducer of stress and the best predictor of health is having lots of
   social support

 Don'ts:
 - don't smoke or overeat

