7a Cognitive Psychology II: Perception, Preconceptions and Judgement

Perception - the whole is not equal to the sum of its parts
 - Figure and ground in perception
 - Gestalt principles/view of perception

Our knowledge and preconceptions shape our perceptions
 - Illusions
 - Perceptual set - situation where expectation of seeing something influence
   what we actually percieve

Judgement under uncertainty
 - Heuristics in judgement
 - Artificial intelligence

7b Perception

Gestalt Psychologists

    The whole is not equal to the sum of its parts

        Our thoughts and perceptions shape what we perceive

        We don't perceive reality, but rather our perceptions are our take on
        reality - even though the reality may be out there in the abstract

        We don't se what's exactly out there, our perceptions are shaped by
        our thoughts

        We see through a lens of our thoughts/perceptions

    e.g. Picture of black dots suggests a dalmation
        "You apply meaning to this smattering of dots."
    e.g. Doghouse illusion with big gaps
        "You see a whole dog house - even though it's an impossible object."

    => We perceive things that aren't really there

    Finger and ground in perception

        e.g. Young lady vs old lady painting depending on what you focus on

        Figure stands out, ground is hidden behind and not being percieved at
        the moment that you are looking at it

        e.g. Vase with two faces

        Tho whole can't be equal to the sum of its parts because you can't get
        two answers from the same part

    Gestalt grouping principles

        e.g. 3 pairs of vertical lines - often called 3 groups due to proximity,
        rather than two groups of three lines, etc.

        e.g. 3 columns - of 3 triangles, circles, and triangles, as opposed to
        rows - grouping principle

        e.g. Continuity principle - squiggle with a line through it vs group
        of semicircles

        e.g. Connectedness - 3 dumbells instead of 6 circles and 3 lines

        e.g. The principle of closure - 3 sliced partial circles that suggests
        a triangle in the middle - our mind wants to connect the lines

        e.g. Gestalt principles of good form - we tend to see things as a whole,
        as a gestalt, as a good form, even when it's not there - cube appearing
        from amongst circles with lines overlayed (Necker's cube)

7c Our Knowledge and Preconceptions Shape Our Perceptions

    Gestalt psychologist's contribution to cognitive psychology

     - showed that thoughts and preconceptions (our beliefs) influence what we
       see

    Muller-Lyer Illusion
        A  B  C
        <-->--<

        AB appears shorter than BC

        Western society sees a lot of corners; certain angles imply that a
        corner is pointing away from us => BC is farther away, so it must be
        longer - probably a result from spending lots of times in buildings

    Ponzo Illusion

        Two parallele lines - one on the bottom looks smaller because of our
        view of perspective on the image underneath

        Also - Shepard illusion - monster chasing another down a hallway towards
        the camera

    The Ames Room

        Room angled, with a slanted floor (shrinking the ceiling) gives the
        impression of a giant and a small person - even though they are the same
        size

    When we think about things, that influences our perceptions of the world
    around us - "top-down processing" shows that our preconceptions/beliefs
    influence our view

    Perceptual set - three drawings of a lady's face - first one or last one
    alone look like a saxaphone player, but seen with the middle one they look
    like faces

7d1 Schemas and Heuristics

    Thoughts (in particular, judgements) are influenced by the way we think
    about the world

    Schemas - ways in which we think about the world, and how we come to
    understand it - summary of what we think the world is like

    Heuristics - simple ways to think about things - shortcut strategies used
    for decision making

    Why do we need schemas?

        Too much information - must decide what we pay attention to - must
        summarize to process/memorize, or communicate to others

        Allow us to go beyond the information given

            e.g. paragraph of "gibberish"
                 LAUNDRY! -> paragraph makes sense now

    Like illusions, heuristics tell us how to process information

        Representativeness heuristic

            e.g. Question - "Linda is a bank teller" or "Linda is a bank teller
            and active in the feminist movement" - people are drawn to say the
            latter because she sounds like a feminist, so they pick the
            representative answer

            e.g. More words in English with K as the first letter of as third
            letter? - the latter, surprisingly - because it's hard to think
            about them

            e.g. If you go to the middle east, should you be concerned about
            terrorist attacks or traffic accidents? - the latter

7d2 UW Research: Priming and Time Judgements (Dr. Jennifer Stolz)

    By priming a concept, judgements about timing can be affected.

    Half of participants - each trial begins with short prime, like "bacon" on a
    screen.

    Other participants get no prime.

    Two different words appear on the screen at almost the same time (~20-100ms)
    with one related to the prime (e.g. eggs).

    Subject is asked which word appeared first.

    Not primed -> equally likely to pick either word
    Primed -> more likely to think eggs appeared first

    Because the concept was primed in your head, it appears to be presented more
    quickly than it actually was

7d3 Artificial Intelligence - Do people think like computers?

    Computers and the development of computers had a big impact on cognitive
    psychology

        Information processing - new model "the computer metaphor" to reason
        about how people thought of things.

    AI was an area of psychology that grew in the 1970s and 80s

    Do people think like computers?

        Early on, computers were a metaphor for how people thought

        When cognitive psychology became popular, we started trying to get
        computers to think like people

         - It could give insight into how people think about things

    Recall how we talked about "encoding", "storage", and "retrieval"?

    Useful to model theoretical thought processes on a computer

    Big lesson - thought is complex and people don't think about things
    consistently - computers and people don't think in the same way - it would
    be very difficult to get a computer to use the same sorts of heuristics that
    we do

