4 Developmental Psychology

4a What is Behaviourism

    Classical conditioning

        Pavlov and his dogs

    Operant conditioning

        Skinner and his pigeons

    "Then came the fall of the house of cards - new theories found flaws in
     traditional conditioning. This is when developmental psychology began."

    Language Acquisition

        How is it that we learn to speak?

    Observational Learning

        "We learn by watching somebody else do something, AKA modelling."

4b Classical Conditioning

    Pavlov wanted to study spit. Why is it there?

        Had test tubes hooked up to the saliva glands of dogs to collect the
        spit.

        He noticed that after a few days, just walking up to the dogs to give
        them food would cause them to salivate.

        He then wondered why they were salivating before food was there.

        Unconditional stimulus (UCS) produces an unconditional response (UCR),
        i.e. food in mouth elicits salivation

        Conditioned stimulus (e.g. metronome) and eventually the neutral
        stimulus alone produces a conditioned response (CR), thus becoming a
        conditioned stimulus (CS).

        Pavlov did this with many different neutral stimuli: lights, bells, etc.

    What is learning and unlearning?

        In classical conditioning, learning is associating conditioned stimulus
        or neutral stimulus with an unconditioned stimulus to the point where
        the conditioned stimulus produces the unconditioned response.

        Pavlov didn't understand the implications of this and didn't realize how
        these results could be generalized/

    John Watson was one of the early American behaviourists.

        Didn't study thoughts, but rather what is observable.

        Used Pavlov's ideas on teaching/learning.

        Wagered that he could take twenty children and raise them to be
        anything. i.e. teaching someone to be afraid of soft and fuzzy.

        You could teach someone something that makes no sense, and they can,
        for example, learn to be afraid of something irrational.

    This is called the process of generalization

        Occurs when conditioned stimulus is changed a bit but the
        conditioned response still happens.

        Screaming and crying is the conditioned response - something that can be
        observed - rather than fear, an unobservable emotion.

    Opposite of generalization is discrimination

        Happens when conditioned stimulus is changes and the conditioned
        response doesn't happen.

        The concept of "unlearning".

        e.g. Little Albert being afraid of of rats but not bunnies because he
        can differentiate between the two.

        Can be taught by presenting the unconditioned stimulus only with the rat
        and never with the bunny.

    Extinction

        Happens when conditioned stimulus (unconditioned response) no longer
        produces the response.

        "When it no longer happens."

        Theoretically happens if unconditioned stimuli is no longer paired with
        the conditioned stimuli.

    Problems with classical conditioning

        The only behaviour being influenced is something that they would
        normally do.

        You can't get the organism to do new, unnatural behaviours (e.g. long
        division). We can't associate a behaviour or stimuli when teaching long
        division.

4c Operant Conditioning

    Allows behaviours that wouldn't naturally occur to happen.

    Skinner proposed that any behaviour engaged by anyone has been learnt
    through operant conditioning.

    How does this happen? How do we get behaviour that doesn't occur as an
    unconditional response (UCR)?

    Skinner proposed that rewarded behaviour occurs more often in the future,
    and behaviour that is not rewarded will occur less often.

    Skinner says almost all behaviour follows this.

    Note: Has nothing to do with punishment, only with rewards (or lack therof).

    By rewarding pigeons with food for doing behaviours which he wanted them to
    do, he could teach them to do miraculous things (e.g. playing Betoven on a
    tiny piano). Pigeons don't do this naturally.

    Learning is, therefore, about taking on new behaviours.

    Different types of reinforcement:

        Positive reinforcer - getting good things

            e.g. The pigeon getting food

        Negative reinforcer - removing bad things (still good)

            e.g. Taking Aspirin to get rid of a headache

        Note: negative reinforcers aren't punishments.

        Skinner said punishment isn't a way to teach - it doesn't show you what
        to do. Something bad happening doesn't teach you what to do.

            Punishment leads to inaction rather than action.

        Primary reinforcers - pleasant in their own right, like candy

        Conditioned (secondary) reinforcers - pleasant through association

            e.g. Associating money (secondary) buys pleasant (primary) things.

            Conditioned stimuli (money) gets associated with unconditioned
            stimuli (what the money buys). Notice how we snuck classical
            conditioning in to help explain operant conditioning.

    Both argue that thoughts are "epiphenomenon" - things that don't matter and
    have no influence. All you need to do is study what can be observed, and
    anything can be explained without looking at thought. This was where operant
    conditioning fell short, however.

4d Language Acquisition

    Was language learned via behaviourism?

        Skinner argued that language was learnt through enforcement.

        e.g. Children receive reinforcement (like affection) from their parents
        when they first began to speak words instead of babbling.

    Chomsky said that language learning was innate - an inborn ability to learn
    language.

    There is a critical period early on in which everyone learns language.

    Chomsky was not a psychologist, but a linguist.

    Aurgued Skinner was naive - language couldn't simply be taught by way of
    reinforcement.

    "You can teach your pigeon to play the piano, Skinner, but can you teach it
     to talk?"

    Bottom line: behaviourism is clearly wrong - children learn language very
    quickly. Babies can hear all the different ranges of sound that people make.

    After about a year, children's brains become used to the language thay they
    hear and can no longer hear certain sounds.

        e.g. Foereign language speakers have a hard time differentiating between
        certain non-native syllables.

    Children can learn thousands of words per day and pick up a foreign language
    without much effort. "Old dogs have a harder time learning new languages
    than the young pups."

    This all suggests that there is a built-in ability to learn language rather
    than learning everything by reinforcement.

4e Observational Learning

    "The final nail in the coffin of behaviourism."

    Bandura - Bobo doll study - trained as a behaviourist but criticized it,
    saying that you can learn by watching others.

    This means that thoughts intervene with one's actions.

    Bobo Doll Study

        In one condition - adults beat up the bobo doll, kick the bobo doll,
        etc. What would the children play with? Will they beat up the bobo doll?

        Those who didn't witness the beatings hit the bobo doll an average of
        two times. Those who did hit it sixty-two times.

        These kids learned how to be violent!

        Bandura argued that children learned to be violent by watching violent
        television.

        This also demonstrated that thoughts matter in learning.

4f The Big Picture: Fundamental Issues Being Addressed

    Nature vs Nurture

    Behaviourists focused most on nurture - Watson raising twenty children into
    anything, Skinner believing he could create a utopian society through
    behaviourist principles.

    Now with langauge acquisition and the inborn ability to learn language, we
    have more of a focus on nature.

    Important question: Could behaviourism explain what was really important? Is
    it applicable to everyday life? Behaviourism tripped up here by not
    explaining observational learning.
    
    Although no longer an over-arching theory, behaviourism can still be used to
    control some behaviours (e.g. in therapy).

