6a Cognitive Psychology I - Memory: The Big Picture

    Memory as information processing

        Stages and events of memory

    Effortful memory

        When we are trying to learn and remember

    Memory without awareness (and without effort)

        When we remember things we do not realize we remember

    The fragility of memory

        Our memories are often a distorted view of reality
        Memory isn't a "steel trap" where events are captured and remain
        perfectly, e.g. when you get in a fight with someone and you both recall
        events differently.

6b Stages of Memory

    External events -> sensory input -> sensory memory -> attention to important
    or novel information (encoding) -> short-term memory -> encoding -> 
    long-term memory

    Short-term memory: Activated memory that holds a few items briefly

    Long-term memory: The relatively permanent and limitless storehouse in
    memory

    Process of encoding, storage, and retrieval

    We can have problems when we don't remember things

    The information may not have been encoded properly

    We could have trouble remembering information if it got lost in storage

    Can have trouble retrieving the information

6c1 How much do we retain?

    How long do you retain things in short-term memory?

        Remember three letters (f, t, z) and count backwards from 100.
        Before 20 seconds is up, they have totally lost it.

        Short term memory is limited in length as well as capacity. The basic
        rule is that our short-term memory can hold 7 +/- 2 things.

        This rule was discovered by Bell labs - this is why we have 7-digit
        phone numbers!

    How long do you retain things in short-term memory?

        Ebbinghaus' Forgetting Curve - memorize syllables, then given a recall
        test. Curve starts around 60% and drops off after day 1, levels off
        around 20%. Note that this is recall, not recognition - recognition is
        similar, but around 30% higher.

    We can relearn information relatively quickly - Ebbinghaus' Retention Curve

    Number of repititions of a list on day 1 decreases amount of time to relearn
    the material on day 2 - information is being retained somewhere for later
    use.

6c2 Cues that Influence Memory

    Ebbinghaus' ideas can be dramatically influenced by cues

    There are all kinds of different cues

    Semantic cues are helpful for memory

    We were given a semantic a semantic hint for one picture - a study used the
    same pictures with two cues: a midget playing a trombone in a telephone
    booth vs. an early bird who caught a very strong worm.

    Semantic cues for helping memory

        Semantic (type of ...)
        Acoustic (rhymes with ...)
        Visual (written in capitals)

    Cues related to the self-concept are even better

        Best cues for memory are those that can be processed by and relevant to
        the individual

        Understanding how it matters to you lets you remember it easier

        Self-reference effect; self-centred memory.

    Context effects

        Other cues from the environment/situation that you are in

        We're better at remembering things if we are in the same state we were
        in when the information was learnt

        Alcohol and memory studies showed this - getting drun while studying?
        Better write the exam drunk! :P

        Mood - We tend to remember happy things more easily when we are happy,
        and sad things when we are sad - those with depression tend to remember
        only the sad things that they have dealt with.

        Thus scuba divers study - memory exercises between land and water showed
        a very strong context effect if you learn and recall in the same
        environment.

6c3 Interference in Memory

    As we learn more, the new stuff we learn interferes with old stuff we
    learned, and vice-versa.

        e.g. Experienced prof used to remember students' names easily, but after
             learning so many names he has trouble learning new names.

    Learning a new language can facilitate or interfere.

    Proactive interference - French, learned beforehand, interferes proactively
    while learning another language like Spanish - the French word might be
    recalled instead of the Spanish one.

    Retroactive interference - Learning Spanish can make it harder to remember
    your previously-learnt French words.

6c4 Strategies to Improve Memory

    Mnemonics - sayings/patterns developed to remember things

        Only assists you with learning lists, but not understanding the content.

        e.g. OCEAN scale - openness, concientiousness, extroversion,
             agreeability, neuroticism

        Just knowing lists isn't that useful, though.

    Chunking

        Group items together into different groups

        Particularly helpful for short-term memory so that you can remember more
        information.

    That's it for effortful memory

        We know memory isn't as good as we would like, is sensitive to cues, can
        be confused by interfering memories, and can be improved with various
        strategies.

6d Memory Without Awareness

    We can be influenced by many subtle things

    Ocean, moon, barn, house, canoe, sand, salt...

    Write down favourite band, coffee, and a laundry detergent.

        Most people now write down Tide after being primed with the ocean words.

    Study of amnesiacs - somebody who has amnesia.

    Different kinds of amnesia

        Bad head injury can wipe out recent memories

        Epileptic seizures can lose a period of memory

        Amnesiacs have suffered brain damage such that short-term memories never
        make it into long-term memory.

        Dan Schachter - story of the golfer

            Avid golfer can't remember anything - says he can't play golf.
            Goes to play golf and has a perfect swing, uses the lingo, etc. but
            in his mind he felt that it was his first time playing golf.

    Procedural memory

        Able to do something even without being aware of it - without
        consciously knowing what they are able to do.

        Despite having no knowledge, people can learn various tasks.

        McMaster University - famous names study

            Week 1 - subjects given list of names to learn
            Week 2 - pick out from the list of names all of the famous people
            Result: People picked out the names from the list from week 1 as
                    famous people.

        People can learn things without being aware of what they have learned.

        Another test:

            Week 1 - Given subjects a long list of words
            Week 2 - Given a word stem, asked to complete it
            Result: They spell out words from the list

        Favourite example - prof always puts his manual transmission into first
        gear at every stop and couldn't recall where/how/why he learned how to
        do that.

6e The Fragility of Memory

    1970s studies revealed just how fragile our memories can be.

    Memory Construction - The Construction of Automobile Destruction (Elizabeth
    Loftus).

        How fast were they going when they bumped into each other? 30kph
        How fast were they going when they smashed into each other? 45kph
        Was there any broken glass? 20% of "smashed" said yes; 2% of "bumped"
        said no.

    Trials - eye witnesses are supposed to know what really happened - but that
    supposition is incredibly naive.

    We tend to remember what we want to remember.

        UWaterloo - Study Skills course study - 8 weeks at UW

            People remember how much their studying was improved, but really
            just exaggerate how bad they were before they started.

    We paint ourselves in a positive light in our memory.

    Do we forget what we want to forget? That's not so easy. The more we try to
    suppress thoughts, the more ofen they come back.

        Post-traumatic stress disorder

    We can construct memories very well, but blocking them is hard.

    Recovered memories:

        Psychodynamic orientation - repressed memories from traumatic events in
        childhood.

        Others believe childhood memories from are just constructions.

        When people recover memories, it can be from hypnosis, guided imagery,
        etc. But are these false memories? Can we ever recover untainted
        memories?

    Cautions

        Research has shown that some memories children have could be
        constructions, but it's easier to show certain things are false than
        when things are true - e.g. memories of abuse shouldn't be disgarded.

        Younger children, people under hypnosis or guided memory, on certain
        drugs like sodium pentathol, tend to be less accurate.

        Memories people have always had some recollection of tend to be more
        accurate.

        It's more important to do more investigations than to rely solely on
        testimony.

        We can't discern what's a true memory and what's a false memory.

