Lecture 02: Behavioural Neuroscience I

2a The Nervous System and the Brain

    Neuron

        Basic cells making up the nervous system

    Peripheral nervous system

        All the other nerves that run through the body which are not the brain
        or the spinal cord

    The central nervous system and the brain

        Is probably one of the frontiers we understand the least in psychology

    The endocrine system

        Hormones

        The different chemicals that float through the blood and also influence
        us

    Putting it all together - hunger example

        Not separate systems, they all work together (e.g. with hunger).


2b1 The Neuron

    Picture - neuron

        Myelin sheath

            Little globule things - not present on neurons iside the brain

            Lets the electric current bounce from node to node so the impulse
            can travel quickly - impulses/reflexes faster than our brain

            Neurons part of the peripheral system and spinal cord actually work
            faster than in the brain

        Dendrites

            Branchy things found at the "back end" of the neuron

        Axon

            Branchy terminal things

        Action potential
        
            Neural impulse moves from back dendrites to the front axons

        Cell body

            Surrounded by the dendrites

            The cell's life support centre

    How do you take a piece of tissue, like a cell or neuron, and have it
    conduct electricity

        Studying sea slugs - they have large neurons

    Inside the neuron is chemical ions of one charge flowing in and out of the
    cell membrane is what creates electricity and causes it to flow down the
    neuron.

    Where two neurons come together - Axon bumping into cell body/dendrites of
    another cell - is a synapse.

        There is a synaptic gap between the sending neuron's axon terminal and
        the receiving neuron's body/dendrite.

        A litle chemical flows between the two - neurotransmitters.

        There are lots of potential connections - a whole bunch of synapses
        "vote" towards firing the signal.

        Some of those neurotransmitters make it a lot more likely for an impulse
        to start, and some make it less likely. Add them all together to decide.

        After the neurons dump their neurotransmitter, how do they get used
        again?

            They transfer back after a short while - reuptake.

    There are lots of different types of neurotransmitters.

        Dopamine
            
            Very common, especially in the brain

            Important in two remarkably different disorders:

                Parkinson's disease

                    Partially caused by deficiency of dopamine

                    Marked by tremors

                    Important in the coordination of movement

                Also important in attention and emotion

                Schizophrenia

                    Marked by an excess of dopamine in various parts of the
                    brain.
        Seratonin

            Involved in mood, hunger, sleep, and arousal

            It affects things widely in the brain

            A deficiency of seratonin is a cause for insomnia

            Deficiencies are also associated with depression

            Prozac, Zoloft - eases to depression

        Norepinephrine

            More related to alertness and arousal

            Also associated with depression

            Older depression drugs used this

        Acetylcholine

            The most common neurotransmitters

            Involved in muscle movement

            Alzheimer's Disease:

                The nerurons that work through acetylcholine get ruined with
                Alzheimer's.

            Also involved in learning and memory

        Endorphines (a whole class of neurotransmitters)

            Involved in pain regulation

                When injured, the body releases these to handle more pain

            Heroine and morphine mimic this neurotransmitter.

2b3 How Drugs Affect Neurotransmitters

    Drugs mimic the shape of a neurotransmitter

    The real transmitter fits really well

    Agonist mimic the neurotransmitter with "2/3 shapes"

    Antagonist block neurotransmitter - it gets in the way.

    So, some drugs work like the neurotransmitter (for deficiencies), while
    others block to reduce an excessive amount.

2c Divisions of the Nervous System

    Nervous system - all the neurons in the body

        Central - brain and spinal cord

        Peripheral

            Somatic - controls voluntary movements of skeletal muscles

            Autonomic - controls self-regulated action of internal organs and
            glands, like pupil dilation

                Sympathetic - arousing - "gets you ready for fight or flight"

                Parasympathetic - calming - "lets you build up all your energy"

2c1 The Peripheral Nervous System

    Autonomic nervous system

        Controls the glands

        Controls the muscles related to our organs

        Possible to regulate with conscious thought, but often spontaneous

            e.g. hiccups

        Sympathetic nervous system - arousal - often stress

            Pupils dilate - see more
            Heartbeat accelerates
            Stomach - digestion is inhibited
            Stimulates glucose release by liver
            Adrenal gland - burst of adrenaline
            Kidney - stimulates secretion of epinephrine, norepinephrine
            Bladder relaxes
            Stimulates ejaculation in male

        Parasympathetic - calming - eating and sleeping
        
            "classic thanksgiving afternoon"

            Pupils contract
            Heartbeat slows
            Stimulates digestion
            Stimulates gallbladder
            Contracts bladder (gets bigger)
            Stimulates erection of sex organs (part of sleep cycle)

2c2 The Central Nervous System

    The spinal cord

        Carries information from the peripheral nervous system up to the brain

        Does some "thinking" in controlling some responses

            Typically refered to as reflexes

            Contains some neurons that cannot only transmit things, but can
            route things different ways, almost making some primitive decisions.

    The Spinal Cord - a simple reflex

        What happens if you put your finger in a flame?

        People usually pull their finger out immediately.

        The decision is made within the spinal cord. It has things called
        interneurons that can "flip a switch" to contract motor neurons directly

        You can override these things with your brain

    The Brain

        Does almost all "processing"

        Three areas of the brain we need to know about

            Brainstem

                Controls all vital functions

                Injury often leads to death

                Very crucial

            The lymbic system

                Controls motivation and emotion

                Very important for memory

            Cerebral cortex

                The bulk of our brain

                Much larger than in animals

                Separates us from animals

        The Four Parts of the Brain Stem

            Medulla

                Absolutely critical in keeping us alive

                Controls the heartbeat and breathing

                On top of the spinal cord - common reason for death by broken
                neck.

                Damage = fatality!

            Reticular formation

                Controls attention, alertness, reactivity

                Can be thought of the accelerator of the brain

                Basic function that regulates the overall amount of brain
                activity

            Thalamus

                Sensory switching point

                Crucial for vision and other senses

                Beginning processes of our senses come about here

            The Cerebellum - cannopy-looking thing under the brain

                Crucial for movement and coordination of movement

                Crucial for balance

                Big in birds

            The Lymbic System - odd shaped grouping of things around brain stem

                Hypothalmus
                
                    Crucial for hunger

                    Controls the hormones of the Pituitary gland

                    Some influence on other emotions as well, particularly
                    pleasure

                Amygdala

                    Important for a number of things, including anger

                Hippocampus

                    Crucial for memory and for laying down the functions of
                    memory

                    Damage can cause severe types of memory loss

            The Cerebral Cortex - basic divisions

                Back part: Occipital lobe

                    Heavily involved in vision

                    Damage can blind - even with working eyes

                Top-back: Parietal lobe

                    Language and facial recognition

                    Lots of things

                Lower around the ear: Temporal lobe

                    Involved in hearing, memory, and mood

                Front: Frontal lobe

                    Important in reasoning and thinking

                    Close to half of the cortex

                    Complex processing of information

            The Cerebral Cortex Functional Divisions - Movement and Sense of
            Touch

                Motor Cortex

                    laid out like a body - toes to trunk to fingers to neck
                
                    left hemisphere section controls the body's right side

                Input: Sensory Cortex

                    left hemisphere section receives from the body's right side

                Motor and sensory are separated by a big groove

                If there is a seizure - too much electrical activity in the
                brain - they convulse if it goes through the motor cortex.

                Epillepsy can happen that misses this - seizures without
                convulsing.

                Stroke can also paralyze here.

                Often movement and touch are both lost, since they are so close.

            Hearing and vision

                Visual cortex - very back of brain

                Auditory cortex - processed right next to ear

                    Damage here can cause deafness with no possibility of
                    correction.

            Left and Right side of the brain

                Left side controls right side of body and vice-versa

                Corpus Callosum - big thick area connecting both sides, for
                exchanging information

                Epileptic study in the 1950s - lots of seizures is very bad, so
                they went in and cut the corpus collosum - cutting the two sides
                of the brain apart.

                This helps to reduce the number of seizures dramaically because
                the electrical impulses do not spread to the other side.

                Odd behaviour was then discovered - the two sides of the brain
                actually perform different functions.

                Left side is more verbal and able to process language

                Right side is better at visual processing and coordinating, and
                can only understand simple language

                Caveat: Left-handers have a brain structured like this, but some
                are reversed.

            Mike Gazanaga Study - helps explain "executive" function of the
            left brain, the ability to explain and interpret what is going
            on.

                Brain is able to do this even when it is wrong

                Right brain can process visual stimuli, and process commands

                When he would flash "get up" to the right side, a number of
                people would get up, and could instantaneously rationalize
                their behaviour.

                Left side is good at rationalizing.

                Would the right side of the brain be better at picking up what
                emotion is being shown on a face?

2d The Endocrine System

    Hypothalmus - brain region controlling Pituitary gland

    Pituitary gland - secretes many different hormones, some of which affect
    other glands

    Testes/Ovaries - secrete male/female sex hormones

    Affects Adrenal glands - inner part, the medulla, helps trigger the fight or
    flight response

    Pancreas - regulates insulin, blood sugar

    Parathyroids - help regulate the level of calcium in the blood

    Thyroid gland - affects metabolism, energy level, weight gain

    Is usually longer term - hormones stick around in the blood stream and keep
    going and going. Short term stuff is usually from the nervous system.

2e Putting it All Together - The Case of Hunger

    When we don't eat for a while, what makes us feel hungry?

    Stomach contractions - carry hunger signal trhough the peripheral nervous
    system to the hypothalmus

    But if we drink lots of water to prevent these contractions, we still feel
    hungry.

    Blood sugar levels interpreted and controlled by the liver and pancreas to
    send a message to the hypothalmus

    Lateral hypothalmus is stimulated and releases the hormone orexin which
    heightens hunger

    fMRI (functional MRI) - shows lateral hypothalmus very active when hungry

    When we eat:

        Stomach expands and this message is transmitted to the hypothalmus

        Blood sugar levels as interpreted and controlled by the liver and
        pancreas send messages of higher levels to the hypothalmus

        Insulin is also released

        Ventromedial hypothalamus is stimulated and leads to the feeling of
        satiation, so we stop the eating

        (This is a simplified, strictly physiological version!)

    Damage to the hypothalamus - rats starve to death, feel lethargic/depressed.

    Damage to ventromedial - rats never stop eating and become enormous

2f Overarching principles

    Lots of specificity, or specialization of function in specific parts of the
    brain.

    However, it's not that simple.

    The whole structure of the brain work together in coordinated, overlapping,
    and redundant systems

        e.g. Anger passes through frontal lobe - we can reason about our
        reaction

    The systems act at the same time to influence hunger

    We can't say THAT part controls THAT one thing

    Despite the specificity and complexity, the brain has lots of plasticity

        If one area is damaged, other areas can take over

            e.g. Prof's daughter had hydrocefilus - bleed in the brain - and
            didn't do any lasting damage despite significant immediate damage.

