5a Developmental Psychology II: The Big Picture

    Physical development

        We'll focus on big changes early and late
    
    Cognitive development

        Piaget's Theory
        Recent evidence extending and qualifying this theory

    Social development

        Attachment Theory - starting in childhood
        Erikson's Theory - whole lifespan
        Gender Development

5b Phsyical Development

    Physical Development in Infancy

        Many milestones, but huge variability among the first two years.

        Movement - rolling over to walking up steps.

            Sudden infant death syndrome can be prevented from rolling over and
            getting their face stuck.

        Standing alone and walking are, on average, separated by a month :3

    Physical Development in Old Age

        Declines in the senses - sharp decline from ages 70 to 90.

        Fatal car accidents most common before 25 and after 55, esp. after 70.

5c1 An Introduction to Piaget's Theory

    Early psychologist active from early 1900s to 1950s.

    Developed his theory by playing with children rather than doing experiments.

    Based on what they did, he would design theories about how they develop.

    Proposed (controversially) that there were stages of development, with
    dramatic shifts rather than continuous development.

    Schema - a way to think about the world.

        Piaget argued each stage had a different way of thinking about the
        world.

            e.g. A classroom - we're supposed to take notes, listen, etc.

    Within each schema, we have:

        Assimilation - adding information to your schema.

            e.g. Had to assimilate note-taking tools, lecturer's style, and
            class format (but we still think of it as a classroom.

        Accomodation - changing your schema based on new information.

            e.g. A play in class instead of a lecture - we would have to
            develop a new schema to accomodate for lighting, performance,
            acting, watching, etc.

5c2 Piaget's Stages of Development

    Birth to 2 years

        Sensorimotor - experiencing world through actions (not much thought).

        Object permanence - developed around 8 months. Before then, a dropped
        rattle would disappear.
        
        Stranger anxiety - fear of people the child doesn't know very well.
        The child learns the permanency of their mother and dislikes their
        absence.

    2 to 6 years

        Preoperational - representing things with words and images, but not
        logical.

            e.g. Taller glass looks like it has more water.
            e.g. Checkers spaced farther apart (even though a 5 year old can
                 count them).

        Pretend play

        Egocentrism - can't see someone else's perspective.

            e.g. Kids describing what they see while hiding their head instead
            of what the other person will see.

        Language development

    7 to 11 years

        Concrete operational - thinking logically about concrete events,
        grasping analogies, arithmetic.

        According to Piaget, they must need these objects in front of them
        though.

    12 through adulthood

        Formal operational - abstract reasoning (seems to have the least
        evidence).

        Mature moral reasoning

5c3 Extensions and Qualifications of Piaget's Theory

    Does object permanence really emerge around 8 months?

        No, it's much earlier, in a more general and gradual way.

    Focus on UWaterloo research - Infant Cognition (Dr. Andrea Aguiar).

        Research assistant, now a professor.

        90% of babies showed a response.

        At 2.5 months - simple rule: if something is behind something you won't
        see it, even if it doesn't cross a gap in the object.

        At 2.5 to 3 months, a doll moving from one side of the object to the
        other surprises the child if it doesn't show in the gap, but don't pay
        attention to height.

        From 3 to 3.5 months, objects appearing unexpectedly from behind shorter
        obstacles will surprise the child.

    Egocentrism and the Theory of Mind

        The notion that you can understand what someone else is thinking.

        Recall: Piaget said egocentrism lasted until around age 7.

        Theory of mind parallels to object permanence - gradual with age, with
        different aspects to full understanding.

        e.g. Sally puts a ball in a red cupboard, but Anne moves it to the blue
        cupboard. Kids predict Sally will open the blue cupboard, based on their
        own perspective. Rather than 7, kids can solve this puzzle around ages
        4-5.

    Development is more continuous and earlier than Piaget proposed.

        Dr. Aguiar's research showed how bits and pieces are picked up over time
        rather than with dramatic shifts.

5d Social Development
5d1 Attachment Theory

    Harlow's monkey studies

        Baby monkeys raised with wire monkey with food, but they prefer soft
        terry-cloth mother without food.

        Harlow believed that affection and touch is very important.

    Theory behind attachment theory

        Inborn need to bond with our caregiver

        This relationship will be the basis for all other relationships that
        individual will have.

    The strange situation - Mary Ainsworth

        Mothers come into the experiment with 13-16 month old, leave child in a
        toy room. How do the children respond to the mother leaving?

        How did the child respond to the mother coming back?

        Secure attachment pattern - child is somewhat upset to see the mother
        leave, but very happy when the mother returns.

        Anxious attachment pattern - child would be very upset when mother
        leaves, but very happy and clingy when they return.

        Avoidance attachment pattern - child is either upset or not when the
        child leaves, but wants nothing to do with her when she comes back.

        These patterns can be divided into secure and insecure attachment.

            Secure - misses the mother, seeks reunion, but is able to deal with
            time on their own.

            Insecure - either doesn't miss theor mother or isn't able to deal
            with being on their own.

        This can predict the number of friends children will make when going to
        school - securely attached infants between 1 and 1.5 are better at
        making friends and have a sense of social competence.

        There is also evidence that people that have secure relationships are
        also the ones who develop good adult relationships.

        This would suggest that trust can be taught through a stable, loving
        relationship with the primary caregiver.

5d2 Erikson's Theory

    Theory goes from infancy to old age.

    Ideas have Freudian roots to them; Erikson was actually Freud's cheufer.

    Believed that there were certain challenges that needed to be dealt with at
    certain points in one's life. Accomplishing those challenges is the primary
    social issue during each stage of life.

    Infancy (<1) - basic issue is trust vs. mistrust.

    Toddlerhood (1-2) - basic issue is autonomy vs. shame and doubt "I can do it
    myself".

    Preschooler (3-5) - Initiative vs. guilt

    Elementary school (6-puberty) - Competence vs. inferiority "doing things
    well"

    Adolescence (teen-early 20s) - Identity vs. role confusion

    Young adulthood - Intimacy vs. isolation

    Middle adulthood - Generativity vs. stagnation "mid-life crisis", "feeling
    like you've contributed to the world", "re-emergence of intimacy and
    identity issues"

    Late adulthood - Integrity vs. despair "I've lived a good life"

    Criticisms:
    
        Culture bound (very western). Intimacy and identity in the early
        1900s have been pushed much later. Autonomy is a very western idea.

        Theory doesn't explain who will have trouble or not.

        Why would Bill Clinton have a mid-life crisis?

        Premature babies - sense of bonding in an incubator is encouraged;
        holding and cuddling with babies, even in the respirator, gives a
        better chance.

        Theory is more of a framework that a serious model; order may not be
        entirely right; some things might be missing.

5c3 Gender Development

    A common observation: children's behaviour, particularly play, is gender
    stereotyped.

    Why does this behaviour come out?

        Is it how parents treat them? Erikson's attachment theory says parents
        shape their children.

        A number of studies showed that parents don't have that much influence
        over children, especially in gener stereotyped behaviour.

        No relationship between the way in which parents treat their children,
        what values the parents have, and how children turn out.

        Gender stereotypes are kinda like learning an accent.

        We pick it up from the society at large.

    Social Learning Theory
        
        The bobo doll version of gender development

        Watch others to see what gets rewarded and what gets punished

        By the way girls and boys are punished/rewareded, children can
        develope gender type behaviour.

    Gender Schema Theory

        Argues that gender is learned from your culture, which gives you a
        gender schema; a gender lens.

        Gender-organized thinking, gender-typed behaviour.

        This model explains why boys and girls tend to have same-sex friends.

    Social learning theory and gender schema theory probably both occure and
    work together to produce gender behaviour.
