1a Introduction to Psychology

    Psychology has a great breadth

    Psychology isn't merely common sense, but often we thought the opposite of
    what is true.

        e.g. Opposites don't attract.

    Psychology isn't about unethical studies, animal torture, etc.

        Since the late 1960s much care is taken to remain ethical.

    Animal sacrifice can still be done, but it is rarer nowadays.

    Now, much research on the brain is done on humans, with machines that can
    take pictures.

    A way to think about psychology:

        It has to do with what people think; it's about the thoughts that are
        in our heads.

        Historically, some thought that 'thoughts' should not be part of
        psychology.

        It also has to do with how we feel about things, our emotions, and
        motivations.

        Reactions, emotions, thoughts, and such are often not aligned.

            e.g. Getting too nervous to ask someone out.

        Psychology is also about how you act.

        So, three main areas: thoughts, feelings, and actions.

History of Psychology

    1b1 The Three Beginnings of Psychology

        Who do we think is the first psychologist?
            1. Freud
                The psychiatric tradition
                Contributed important contribution to the beginnings of
                psychology
                Started psychoanalysis
                Tradition more represented in medicine nowadays
            2. Testing tradition
                Seen most heavily in intelligence testing
                Developed in England
                Sir Francis Galton, a first cousing of Charles Darwin
            3. Academic approach (laboratory psychology)
                Wilhelm Wundt
                    Set up the first psychology laboratory
                    Wundt is interesting for his failure
                    Scientific approach
                    Chemical - 'mental atoms' of thoughts
                William James
                    A student of Wundt's and a contemporary of Freud's
                    Made much ley progress
                    Brought psychology to North America
                John B Watson
                    Early proponents of behaviourism
                Gestalt pschologists in Europe

    1b2 The Psychiatric Tradition

        Dominated by Freud

            Had a very complex theory about the way the psyche worked
            Two primary motives driving people - sex and aggression
            Much of what drives our behaviour is unconscious
            Huge inner mental life that we are unaware of which is very complex
            and very devious

            One of his most famous, whacky ideas - Oedipus complex.

                Influenced much of adult development.
                Was the central problem to human psyche.
                "As children boys want to have sex with their mother, and in
                realizing that this is not possible, vicariously live this
                through his father's sex life with the mother."
                Didn't explain how women developed at all.

        Carl Jung

            Incredibly brilliant
            More important for his literature
            His psych theories not taken very seriously

        Carl Adler

            Had different ideas from Freud
            Adler believed that people wanted to be powerful and in control
            Echoed in modern psych via self esteem

        Ego Psychologists

            Followed in the Freudian tradition and have made an important impact
            on modern psychology.

            Erik Erickson - model of social development
            Karen Horney and Henry Stack Sullivan - focused on the importance of
            relationships in developing the self-concept.
            (Social psych, social psych of relationships very contemporary.)

        Major assumptions of the psychiatric tradition

            Cannot rely on what people say or do to indicate anything, because
            most mental life is unconscious.

                Less emphasis on what people tell you, but on the interpretation
                of what is said.

            Emphasis on understanding each individual person comprehensively.

                Studying one person at a time and knowing all details.

                Most research done in the psychiatric tradition has been through
                therapy over a number of years

                Understanding the individual comprehensively as a whole

            The best approach is a clinical approach

                More is learned by people who are sick than those who are
                healthy, and by doing therapy. That tells you more about what
                is hidden beneath the psyche, what is really going on.

    1b3 the Testing Tradition

        Charles Darwin

        Sir Francis Galton - Darwin's cousin

            Naive idea of how to study what makes people "fit".
            What makes people geniuses?
            Underlying elitism/aristocracy - some people were better than
            others.

            Conencted his ideas to Darwin's theory of evolution.

            Assumed smartest people were those who were the most fit.

            Believed the first measure of intelligence was physical tests.
            (Following a spinning disk, riding a bike fast.)

            "A miserable failure. But a brilliant Mathematician!"

        Spearman

            Student of Galton, developed many new important statistical
            techniques.

            Factor analysis - way of figuring out what goes together.

        Cattel & Eysenek

            Students of Spearman
            Famous in the trait tradition
            Two different views ended up creating similar model
            Two major components to personality:
                1. Introversion vs Extroversion
                2. Neuroticism vs Mellow

        Binet

            First to figure out how to actually perform an intelligence test.

            Covered topics one would learn at school.

            Trying to figure out age/grade level.

            Very similar to what we now think of as school testing.

        Major assumptions of the testing tradition

            1. Psychology is primarily a product of biology

                 Emphasis on nature over nurture

                 If you want to know what people are about, study the
                 evolutionary basis of behaviour.

            2. There are only a few ways in which people differ

                There are only a small number of traits which can explain how
                people differ

            3. People's traits can be understood through simple tests.

                Questionnaires and paper and pencil tests make up almost all of
                the research in this tradition

    1b4 The Academic Tradition

        Wilhelm Wundt

            Psychological atomism

            Would have people come in and tell him about a thought that they
            had had; introspect

            Thought he would get a nice periodic table of "psychological atoms",
            but it made no sense

        William James

            Pragmatism

            Believed Wundt was wrong for not studying what people really cared
            about

            Pragmatic approach - study things that are meaningful to people

            Still important in North American psychology

            "What does this matter?" is an important question.

        Watson & Skinner

            Took the approach of behaviourism, which dominated NA psych for
            about 40 years

            Believed that Wundt was not scientific enough, studying thoughts
            which cannot be observed

            If we need to be scientific, we need to study something observable,
            like behaviour.

            Defined psychology as the scientific study of behaviour.

            Made progress in a number of different domains

        Kurt Lewin

            European

            Gestalt psychology

            Argued that Wundt made a wrong assumption, that the whole does not
            equal the sum of its parts.

            This was a powerful perspective.

            Many times the parts don't add up to the wholes that we see and come
            to know and understand.

        Major assumptions

            Psychology is best understood when the causes are understood
                
                We need to understand what causes a behaviour

                The why is more important than the how or the when

            People's thoughts and actions can be understood.

                Thoughts and actions are not outside of the individual, are not
                irrelevant.

                By observing people, we can understand them

            Systematic study produces the fullest understanding

                Labs were set up

                Wundt's lab - how long does it take to press a button?

                    Reaction time

    1b5 Three New Beginnings in Psychology

        In the 1960s and 70s, these traditions each had a rebirth

        The Psychiatric Tradition

            Humanistic Approach "Third Wave"
            
                First was psychiatric
                Second was behaviours

            Carl Rogers

                What Rogers tried to do in his therapy was very different from
                the pschoanalytic tradition

                He reflected back to the individual what they were feeling

                Belief that people are basically good, and if you let them get
                in touch with themselves and understand themselves they will get
                better

                They need to get in touch with this good inner part of who they
                are
            
        The Trait Tradition

            Expanded to 5 from 2 traits - OCEAN

                Openness = intelligence
                    
                    Open to new experiences -> more education, more flexible
                    thinking

                Conscientiousness
                
                    people who stick to their goals and work to get things done

                Extroversion

                    (Above)

                Agreeableness

                    How positive or negative of a person are you

                Neuroticism

                    (Above)

        The Academic Tradition

            The cognitive revolution

                In the 60s and 70s there was growth and changes from
                behaviourism to cognitive psychology

                Study of thought is one of the primary and important things
                about people

                Albert Bandura - observational learning

                It became clear that with behaviourism, there was much that
                could not be explained

                We can learn by observing people rather than just being
                reinforced ourselves

                Changed the face of psychology

    1c1 Basic Philosophy of Science

        (Behind research methodologies of psychology.)

        Big questions behind research methodology

        Focus on academic tradition

        Other traditions do not necessarily feel the same way

        Our ideas can be wrong

            "Healthy skepticism"

            "I know my idea can be wrong"

            We set out to demonstrate that our ideas are wrong

                Only draw firm conclusions when we have shown that the idea is
                wrong

            We accept an idea when we can't prove that it is wrong

                "The textbook should not be read as fact, but as a bunch of
                ideas we haven't disproved yet."

                This doesn't protect the idea from being disproved in the future

                Good to have healthy skepticism when reading the text

            We might prove everything wrong later!

                True in all branches of science, including physics.

        A number of things influence these ideas.

            What is accepted is often what is popular rather than the data.

            Also shaped by political forces and social influences.

    1c2 Ways of Doing Research

        Tension between discovery and explanation

            When something is discovered and is brand new, does it mean
            anything?

            Some sciences are mostly about explanation; how things work, how
            things unfold (like chemistry).

                Astronomy is more abour discovery.

            Psychology is in the middle - new discoveries, but explanation is
            important

            Different traditions have different emphasis on discovery and
            explanation

            Psychiatric tradition uses mostly case studies in its research.

        Freud's famous case study - Anna O

            Freud was Anna's therapist for many years
            Developed an unusual sickness after a couple of years of caring for
            her sick father
            Was blind even though nothing was physically wrong with her
            Also had glove paralysis - paralysis of her left hand.

                Strange - it should be numb all the way up her arm!

            Freud believed that Anna was having fantasies about sex with her
            father, and that was the cause of her problems.

            Many modern psychologists feel that Anna was being sexually abused
            by her father

            Freud thought her tales of abuse were part of her fantasy

        Naturalistic observation

            Similar to case study but usually broader

            Observe, watch, and see what happens

            Jane Goodall's research with chimps

            Not very often done with people

        Survey research

            Question a sample of the population

            Goal is to find out what the whole population is like

            Want to represent the whole population from just a sample of people

            Establishes generality

            Sets up correlations between variables

                When one thing happens, another thing tends to happen

            Correlation between children watching violent tv and being violent

            Can randomly sample children throughout all of Canada to find out
            how much ciolent tv they wathc

            Then, find out how often they use violent behaviour

            What you find is a nice, reliable correlation between the two

        Correlation doesn't mean causation

            Just because kids who watch violent tv tend to be violent doesn't
            necessarily mean that the tv caused the kids to be violent

        Experiments

            Usually about establishing causation

        Example of correlation established by survey research

            One possibility is that the violent television causes the violent
            behaviour, but what is really going on?

            Maybe its that violent kids like to watch violent tv

            Whenever you have a correlation, you have to think about which
            direction it goes in. Does A cause B or does B cause A?

            Or maybe a third thing causes both behaviours - abuse?
            Hyperactivity?

            Maybe it's education? Parent's background?

            There is always the possibility of having many variables when you
            have a correlation

            Causation establishes which one it is, which pattern is right

    1c3 Research Methods - Surveys & Establishing Representativeness

        Representative group of people

        You want the people filling out the survey to correspond to the larger
        group that you want to generalize and represent

        Random sampling

            On surveys

            Survey a subset of a large group of people

        Random assignment

        Surveys must also be unbiased

            Anchoring effects

                Give people something that you know is wrong but influences the
                way they interpret the question

                Is the Mississippi river longer or shorter than 500 miles? How
                long is it?

                Will actually give a short estimate because they are still
                influenced by the 500, even though that info is wrong.

                People given that question gave answers ~2000 shorter.

                Given X terrible incident, is capital punishment justified?
                Given the legislative slowness behind capital punishment, is it
                justified?

            Framing effects

            Surveys do a good job of establishing correlation between variables

    1c4 Correlation is not Causation: How do you establish causation?

        Correlation
            
            When one variable changes, the other variable changes as well

        Time order

            Know which "cause" comes first

            Longitudinal research - over time.

                e.g. Asking about tv usage/violence now then 3 years later

        Elimination of all other possible causes

            Were their parents more aggressive?
            Did they come from poor families?
            Were the children who were more aggressive likely to be hyperactive?

            Experiments do this by random assignment

                Randomly assign people to various conditions

                Take a small group in an experiement, and randomly have one half
                do one thing and the other half do another.

            Independant variable

                What we think is going to be the cause
                Experimental group - watches television
                Control group - doesn't watch television

            Dependent variable

                Behaviour that you are concerned with in the end; the effect
                Have children play together to see if they will fight

                We want the dependent variable to be:

                    Valid - measures what it is supposed to measure

                    Reliable - get the same outcome every time

                e.g. Violent tv variable needs to measure violence, like
                fighting. This is valid, but not reliable - kids don't always
                fight the same amount.

                Reliable = highly clustered data in the same place of a target
                Valid = hitting the bullseye

                Time order is built in

                    Independent variable leads to the dependent variable

            Random assignment eliminates other causes via probability theory.

